
# Introduction

## Introduction by Owen Lattimore
In the late 1930's and the war years, Jack Belden was to me, and I think to quite a number of people who had been in China longer than he had, a legendary figure. He was the man who knew the seamy side of China, where the lice lurked. Most of the rest of us, except for Edgar Snow and Agnes Smedley, were a prosaic lot. Either we had been brought up in China or we had come out to take jobs that had been arranged before hand, or to study the language on academic fellow ships. Jack Belden had worked his way out as an able-bodied seaman and then jumped ship in Hong Kong. After that, he knocked about in the seaport cities and made forays into the hinterland. From the beginning, he seems to have distrusted the intelligentsia and to have had a fellow feeling for the disinherited and the down-and-out. He was the man who knew what underemployed peasants, underpaid workers, and sullen soldiery did about sex, drink, and drugs. 
When the all-out Japanese invasion began in 1937, Jack Belden had already been in China about five years. He had seen a good deal of the country, in the areas where the shock of the Japanese invasion was going to be most brutal, and he knew something of the language. Judging from the indications here and there in his writing, it was more the language of the uneducated and the semi-literate than that of the intellectuals and political hacks. It is also plain, from his writing as a whole,that Belden has an affinity for men of action and is wary of intellectuals. He knows what theory and ideology are, but he is not captivated by them. In a characteristic passage in China Shakes the World, he describes a man of peasant origin who had gone to middle school and then to a course for training Chiang Kai-shek's gendarmerie. Repelled by the treatment he got there, the peasant had deserted and made his way to Yenan. By the time Belden met him, he was a veteran organizer and leader of the guerrillas. 
"He was one of the finest examples of a type of man that was by no means rare in Communist areas," Belden writes. "He was that entrancing combination of man of action and intellectual. He had a grave, quiet manner that engendered trust. I often thought that if men of this type gained control of the Communist movement—and the question of power has not yet been completely settled among the Communists—then there would be little to fear from it. If the pure intellectuals gain the upper hand, then cultism may rule China. 
Belden reported the early stages of the Japanese invasion. He was the man who broke the story of how the peasants of northern Honan, embittered and crazed by the way they had been racked and taxed and exploited by the army and officials of Chiang Kai-shek, rose up and welcomed the Japanese invaders. (I can remember something similar in the province of Jehol, in 1933, when the Japanese took 100,000 square miles of territory in ten days, When I asked the peasants who were waiting for the oncoming Japanese, who were only a few miles away,what they thought of it all, they said stolidly, "We don't know the Japanese. We know our own governor. If we can eat his liver and drink his blood, that's enough.") 
Later Belden saw the great Anglo-American-Chinese defeat in Burma(Retreat with Stilwell) and the war in North Africa and the landings in Europe (Still Time to Die). He saw a lot of war. He was one of the great war correspondents, but not as famous as others because his despatches did not get printed in full and because he did not catch the fancy of those at the upper levels of the political and military establishments who had it in their power to make a reporter fashionable. 
When he got back to China late in 1946, there was no reporter of any nationality better equipped to record the final civil war between Chiang Kai-shek and the Communists. He knew the country, he knew far more of the language than most correspondents, and he knew and saw through both the conventional military thinking of the Americans and the Chiang clique and the conventional American image of China. 
Considering the sour, dense, obstinate refusal of the makers of American policy to look at the facts of a revolution which was going on right under their eyes, and being observed by consuls in many Chinese cities and officers attached to many Chinese military units,not to mention missionaries and the representatives of various relief units, and considering their bewitched belief that the incantation of words like "freedom" and "democracy" (accompanied by the spending of lots of money) could somehow conjure up an Ohio-like or NewEngland-like regime capable of reversing a revolution already in being, we are lucky that the best reports on that revolution have also been written by Americans. 
They cover a wide range, and this is not the place to write an essay on all of them, but there are two that must be mentioned if one is writing about Jack Belden's work. 
Edgar Snow's Red Star over China, published just as the all-out Japanese assault on China began, holds its place as a classic because of the author's own unchallengeable honesty and because he was the first to tell us, more than thirty years ago, what the Chinese Communists were like when they assembled at Yenan at the end of the Long March, and what their leading representatives had to say for themselves and their movement, in their own words. I remember talking to a Communist about Snow, years ago, at a time when adherents of Chiang Kai-shek were denouncing him as nothing but a mouthpiece for Communist propaganda. The Communist shook his head. No, he said, they respected Snow as a completely honest man. His reporting of facts could be relied on. But his interpretations did not entitle him to rank as a "spokesman," because he did not really understand Marxism. 
Be that as it may, only those who were in China at the time can recall the full impact of Snow's Red Star over China. For a decade, the Kuomintang had been alternately reporting the extermination or the approaching extermination of the "Red bandits." From the other side, in Comintern reports and fervid articles in the left-wing journals, which most of us never saw (I myself, in those days, had only a hazy idea that they even existed), came stories of peasant heroes, under the inspiration of "proletarian leadership," battling for the cause of "the masses"; but these heroes, alas, were stereotypes, not real flesh and blood. We foreigners, under the shield of extraterritorial privilege, continued to play polo, go to cocktail parties, picnic in the western hills of Peking, or speculate on the exchange value of the Chinese dollar. 
The political vocabulary of most foreigners did not go beyond cliches: the Chinese, especially the peasants, were not interested in politics. Give them law and order and reasonable taxes and they would make no trouble for anybody. Talk of "classes" and "masses" was the jargon of "agitators." What China needed was men of striking personality,"mandate of heaven" types. The great question was whether Chiang Kai-shek was going to prove himself enough of a strong man to subdue "all under heaven"—and at the same time guarantee the interests of the foreign powers. Quite a few foreigners in China thought that the "firm hand" of Japan was a good thing; it might "bring the Chinese to their senses." 
It is true, however, that some were worried by the fact that Japan, by carving out huge areas of special interest like "Manchukuo," was breaking the rules of the international club that controlled China by indirection and insured, theoretically, free competition among all the imperialist powers. How could the club continue to demand a standard of law and order while refusing to restrain Japan, a club member, from carrying out a policy of lawlessness and disorder? 
In this depressing twilight of political thinking, Snow's Red Star over China burst like a fireworks display. It revealed the outlines of things until then unseen or only dimly guessed at. This was not propaganda. It was a description. There was another China. Snow relayed to us what the Communist leaders had to say, and what they had to say turned out to be not gramophone records reiterating doctrine, but pithy suggestions applicable to the existing problems of China and to the possibility of organizing resistance to Japan. Moreover, Red Star is a big book, and its abiding importance rests on much more than a quotation of the words of leaders. Snow was the first to describe the Communist-led phase of the Chinese revolution as a movement in which widening circles of voluntary adherence kept spreading out around a nucleus of Communist leadership. 
In the days of Sun Yat-sen, there had been a similar phenomenon of outer voluntary adherence to the inner core of the Kuomintang, but by the late 1930's, the Kuomintang was thinking of itself as an elite, charged with a mission to impose discipline and obedience on the unenlightened masses. For this reason, the confrontation between the Kuomintang and the Chinese Communist Party (Kungch'antang) is bound to be misunderstood if it is represented as a rivalry between totalitarianisms. The contest was in fact between a self-selected leadership which aimed at imposing control, and a "dialectical" movement in which the Communists, also a self-selected group, sought those principles and methods that would attract voluntary support, while vast numbers of a still inchoate nation were in search of a leadership which they could willingly follow because it represented and served what they felt to be in their own interests—and increasingly, year by year, rejoiced when they convinced themselves that they had found that leadership in the Communist Party. 
This feeling for the difference between a movement in which leaders and followers interact is deployed even more consciously, and in great detail in a second American classic of the Chinese Revolution, William Hinton's Fanshen. Hinton deals with a limited region in North China. He reaches back in time to give a sketchy account of the region before the Japanese invasion, with spontaneous local resistance crippled at first because too many of the landlords and what was left of the Kuomintang structure of privilege and control collaborated with the invaders. He then discussed the revival of the will to resist, increasingly stimulated not only by the advanced outlying agents and organizers of the Communist Eighth Route Army but—and this marks the difference between a "movement" increasingly generating its own momentum and a "controlled" revolution—by the word of mouth, spread from peasant to peasant, of news and stories of "how to do it," "the right way to do it," land "this is the way 'they' [the Eighth Route Army] do it. 
Triumph: The local Japanese withdraw, and from far away comes the news that all the Japanese have surrendered. The people savour therewards of their own heroism. 
Disaster: The troops of Chiang Kai-shek, the landlords, and the Kuomintang place-holders and place-seekers all return. They hunt down the heroes of the Resistance, who are no longer heroes but "subversives. 
Liberation: But two things have changed. By reason of what they have done for themselves and learned to do for each other, by reason of their common suffering and common achievements, a significantly large proportion of the peasants are no longer the same old peasants, resigned to being ordered about. And the main function of the Eighth Route Army was no longer to inspire nationalistic resistance to foreign invaders. The Army itself, and the outlying partisans and village militiamen who had more and more closely affiliated themselves to the Eighth Route, were now ready to support the demands of the peasants for a voice in deciding their own fate—demands that led inevitably to class warfare, so that in the end, "liberation" came to mean more than pushing an old party aside and putting a new party in power: it meant the destruction of a class system and the transformation of a society. 
It is better not to call the demands of the peasants (and others) "democratic," because "democracy" means too many different things to different people. What was involved is illustrated by one of Hinton's stories. For the sake of brevity, I paraphrase his description, and hope that, in doing so, I do not distort his meaning. The Communists encouraged the villagers to speak out on their grievances and to speak upon what they thought should be done. The Communists, as professional revolutionaries, would then discuss among themselves what the people were saying and demanding. If they adopted as policy what the people were calling for in the heat of the moment, how far would it broaden the movement, and how far might it stiffen opposition? They would then call more village meetings, make it clear that they sympathized in general, but suggest some changes. These exchanges went on and on, back and forth, the Communists not imposing changes and sometimes modifying their own suggestions, if the popular will was firm and clear. From time to time, the results of the village debates would be carried, by delegates, to a higher level—a region that included many villages. Hinton once asked a regional official if he didn't think the villagers would get tired of this endless talking and referring back and forth. "They won't get tired. It's their own future they're deciding". 
This is where Jack Belden comes in. His area of travel and observation overlaps Hinton's, but is much wider—it includes the Northeast (Manchuria) and the lower Hwai and Yangtze valleys. He also overlaps Hinton in time, dealing in the main with the Liberation War (civil war after the Japanese surrender), but with many references to the past and to the course of the civil war in other regions. His account therefore ramifies much more widely than Hinton's, but while he has a number of intensive descriptions of limited areas and what happened there, he has no long-sustained account centered on a particular area, as Hinton does. He is also measurably more detached than Hinton. He was, after all, a newspaperman; he was observing, not helping, not participating. Hinton was working with students and cadres who had been sent to the villages to promote and participate in fanshen—that unique process in which the "mass" overturns the old order, and the individual "converts himself—and he identified himself very closely with his companions and with the village people. 
In one respect, Belden's experience differed both from Snow's and Hinton's. In 1947-48-49, as chaos deepened and Chiang Kai-shek's authoritarian control weakened, an American reporter could slip back and forth between areas that were under full Communist (Eighth Route Army) control; partisan and militia areas that were controlled by the Communists, as far as they were controlled at all, by influence but not by authority; and Kuomintang areas. Belden took advantage of this. The Kuomintang were so deeply dependent on American aid and the hope of more aid to come that they could only partly limit the movement of reporters, even when they distrusted them. As for the Communists, their liberal treatment of reporters is extraordinary evidence of their confidence in themselves and their cause, and their subtle understanding that, things being as they were, the average American would be more sympathetic to what he saw behind the lines than to what he encountered in regions being ravaged by the death-throes of the Kuomintang. 
Red Star over China is a long-established classic. Fanshen is also an unchallengeable classic. It is, I think (for that period of Maoism), the best revelation of the Maoist "style in action," including the bold principle of allowing mass meetings to call the cadres and Party members before them, question them roughly, and challenge not only their actions and policies, but even their personal integrity. Standing between these two, China Shakes the World has until now been a neglected masterpiece. How is this to be explained? 
Red Star was published when a decade of frustration was coming to an end—the Japanese invasion of Manchuria, Italian invasion of Ethiopia, the Spanish Civil War, renewed Japanese encroachment in China, Munich. The effects of these regional aggressions were clearly converging toward a world war of incalculable sweep, terror, and suffering. Where were the forces which could be rallied against fascism and militarism? Conservatives and untold numbers of "moderates" or "liberals were paralyzed by German, Italian, and Japanese propaganda describing a Communist world menace; they hesitated and wondered if the fascists and militarists might indeed be holding back a "Red tide of Bolshevism". Suddenly Snow revealed a Communist movement which included untold numbers of non-Communists who did not stand apart in doctrinal isolation, whose leaders walked about the streets of Yenan without bodyguards and who, in the name of national unity, had saved the life of their most embittered enemy, Chiang Kai-shek. Looking back, it is clear that Snow's part in preparing American opinion—and indeed, world opinion—for a stand against international aggression in which Communists would be acceptable allies was of world historical importance. 
Fanshen was published long after the period it describes. Hinton returned to America in 1953. The influence of Senator Joe McCarthy and of Senator Pat McCarran's Senate Internal Security Committee lay heavy on the land. Hinton's papers were seized, and it took years of litigation—costing a lot of money—to get them back, which explains why Fanshen was not published until 1967. By then, McCarthy-McCarranism was fading (though it has not altogether faded out, even yet), and a new generation had grown up to read Fanshen and, having read it, to ask the probing questions: "If Fanshen describes what was really happening in China, then why, at that time, was America being fed with horror tales about Communism being imposed on China by methods of terror directed by a Moscow dictatorship, and why did people believe these tales?" What is the answer? 
China Shakes the World supplies at least part of the answer, and the fact that it was not a best-seller when it appeared and has since then been a neglected masterpiece has much to do with that answer. Unlike Hinton, who was both participant and observer but not an on-the-spot reporter, Jack Belden was a working reporter, but he was a reporter at a time when the "China Lobby," which was to become the McCarthy-McCarran cloud, was already smudging the American horizon. More than once, he mentions that not a word of some reports he sent to America was published and mentions at the same time the distorted version of what was going on in China put out by the late Senator Knowland (Republican, California) and the late William C. Bullitt. 
It is this aspect of his work that makes it even more important to read Jack Belden at the present time, the time of the Vietnam War, than to read Edgar Snow or William Hinton. Page after page is a reminder that the stupid, obvious, unnecessary mistakes made by the American political and military establishments in China have been made over again and are still being made in Vietnam. 
How many more times must these mistakes be spelled out, syllable by syllable? Already, the American people understand more about what is going on and what is going wrong than those in authority, who are trapped in the channels of bureaucracy and precedents and trammelled by the rules of prescribed behavior. This gap can only be filled by the bulldozer of more pressure from the people on the government. For those who want to know more about the job that has to be done, Jack Belden's account of what went on so long ago and far away in China is invaluable as a general description of the problems of any Asian society, fettered by the colonial heritage of the past and trying to win a foothold in the Twentieth Century; and more than that, it shows why a society blinded by imperialistic preconceptions cannot produce an administration, Democratic or Republican, capable of seeing the facts as they are—let alone dealing with them. 

OWEN LATTIMORE, 

The University of Leeds, 

January 1970



# Ⅰ.Into Red China 

## 1.Foreword
When World War II ended, Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek must have been content. 
The Japanese Army, which he had resisted so stubbornly, but so unsuccessfully had just surrendered to him without a fight. The Western powers, with equal docility, had given up their hundred-year role of imperialist aggression, returned the treaty port concessions and recognized China as a fully sovereign state and Chiang as her rightful ruler. Among his own countrymen, Chiang's position appeared even more secure. Under his command, he now had an army of four million men, thirty-nine divisions of which had been American trained and equipped; he had the largest air force any Asiatic mainland power had ever possessed, and he held captive or had made innocuous nearly every warlord or politician who had ever opposed him. The only possible challenge to his power was a band of Communist guerrillas whom eight years before he had penned up in the barren loess and cave country of the northwest and all but liquidated. 
Emerging from his wartime hide-out at Chungking, China's dictator returned in triumph to his capital in Nanking, ready, willing and seemingly able once more to assume undisputed sway over 450,000,000 people. Outwardly, the generalissimo appeared to have become the most powerful ruler in the last two centuries of Chinese history. 
Less than four years later, as I wrote these words, the prospects of Chiang had undergone a cataclysmic change. He had already fled from his capital and sought refuge in his ancestral home, the premier of his government had unblushingly urged the United States to revive the unequal treaties and establish military and naval bases in China, and his wife had come to this country to beg American officials to save the shattered fortunes, perhaps, in the long run, the very life of her husband. 
In the meantime, these same despised Communist guerrillas have conquered all of Manchuria and North China, captured the capital of Chinese nationalism at Nanking, crossed their Rubicon on the Yangtze and are threatening to overrun the whole country and bring tumbling into ruins, not only the twenty-year reign of Chiang Kai-shek, not only the 100-year reign of Western imperialism in the Orient, but also a way of life that has existed almost unchanged in China for over two thousand years. 
Unless all signs are deceiving, it appears likely that just as the Russian Revolution was the greatest by-product of World War I, the Chinese Revolution will be the greatest by-product of World War II. 
You will find few such abrupt changes in history, especially if you remember that it involves one-fifth of the world's population. Nor will you find many people who foresaw this dramatic turnabout in China's civil war. 
When I returned to China at the end of 1946, I found that among foreign observers there were three general opinions about the outcome of the war between Chiang and his enemies of twenty years' standing. 
A small group of Western military men believed that the generalissimo would overrun the Communists within a year and force them to surrender or liquidate them. An even smaller group (considered very radical and leftish) believed, if there were no foreign intervention, that the war would go on for twenty, thirty, and even fifty years. The opinion of by far the greatest majority, however, was that Chiang, though not being able to eliminate the Communists entirely, would nevertheless be able to drive them back in the hills, open up the railways, and once more unite the country with no one to dispute his control. 
In the light of events, these opinions must be considered as ill informed as those of the poll takers who predicted that the American people would vote President Truman out of office. Fundamentally, these prophecies backfired for the same reason—failure to look into the hearts of a number of very common people. 
This would seem so trite as to need no further elaboration. But even today, when the Chinese Communists are everywhere victorious over Chiang Kai-shek, the causes of these tremendous events are either ill understood or deliberately blurred. Thus we find such highly placed people as ex-Ambassador William C. Bullitt, Congressman Walter Judd, General Claire Chennault, Alfred Landon, and a strange group of lugubrious mourners at Chiang Kai-shek's bier putting the blame for this supposedly regrettable state of affairs on mistakes in George Marshall's policy, Russian machinations, Communist propaganda, and God knows what else. Looking around right and left, casting their eyes heavenward in horror, but never earthward in sympathy, these China experts have discovered every reason for the defeat of Chiang Kai-shek but the right one—the Chinese Revolution. This revolution—and nothing else—is the miracle that has brought China's once proud dictator to his feet in near ruins and has so changed the correlation of forces in the Orient that the whole history of the world is likely to be altered. 
This mighty event did not take place overnight, and it is still going on; The fact that it ever occurred at all was due to one of the greatest tragedies of modern times—the collision between the capitalist West and the feudal East. The intermingling of these two civilizations resulted in the slow, but nevertheless cataclysmic, proletarianization of nearly the entire Chinese people. Such a process proceeded not along any narrow Marxian path, but unrolled down a broad avenue of almost universal dissolution, with peasant, intellectual and ruler all being dispossessed from their environment. By 1945, this abscessed condition of the Chinese people burst forth once more in renewed civil war and quickly thereafter passed over into revolution. 
The premises of the Chinese Revolution, like any other great social revolution were: 
1. A disintegrating society, so diseased that it had become incapable of solving the urgent problems of the nation or the living conditions of her people. 
2. A bitter hostility to the existing regime plus a revolutionary mood among huge masses of people who were so far gone in despair that they were willing to undergo supreme sacrifices and resort to the most extreme and even suicidal measures to save themselves. 
3. Irremedial contradictions within the ruling group which had lost all creative powers and confidence in its ability to get society out of its blind alley. 
4. A new group or party which could utilize all the above factors in order to gain control over society and put into practice its own program for saving that society. 
All of these factors produced, and are still producing the Chinese Revolution. Undoubtedly, it is in the historic conditions which formed China that one must seek the chief clue to the Chinese Revolution. The changed economic structure of China, as a result of Western penetration, along with the destruction of nearly all previously held life values, produced a conflict of classes within Chinese society, which led to the need for revolution. 
Between need and possibility, however, there is a wide gulf. For a hundred years, the necessity to transform Chinese society by revolution has been imperative. But that revolution never was completed for the simple reason that foreign imperialism was entirely too strong to permit the Chinese people to take control over their own destinies. The Second World War, which brought about the defeat of Japan, the most dangerous and most powerful of the imperialist countries in the Far East, plus the weakening of western European imperialism, was what made the Chinese Revolution possible and also what changed it in a new direction. 
Here again, however, there is also a wide gulf between the possibility of revolution and the success of revolution. It is perfectly clear that without the defeat of Japan, without the weakening of Western capitalism, and without those changes which took place inside of China during the Japanese invasion, the Chinese Communists would never have been able to conquer state power. However, it is equally clear, that the Second World War, except in a basic way, cannot account for the immediate events of China's civil war. Nor can the changes in China's economy or the social bases of her classes between 1945 and 1949 account for the twists and turns which that war took. These changes were entirely too insignificant to explain why the Communists were victorious over Chiang Kai-shek just at this moment in world history. 
Without wishing to give psychological elements any more weight than they deserve, it is nevertheless impossible to avoid the conclusion that China's dictator was defeated when he was because of the swift and intense changes which took place in the feelings of a decisive portion of the Chinese people between 1945 and 1949. 
This change in mass consciousness did not take place in any serene and academic atmosphere, but in one highly charged with emotion. Between 1945 and 1949, it was emotion that played the principal role in China's civil war. That this emotion was produced by previously existing external conditions, the writer does not deny. But it was only when the passions of the Chinese people burst their old confining fetters and in turn reacted on the objective conditions of Chinese society that the Communists and their allies were able to ride to power. 
It was passion and principally passion that overwhelmed Chiang Kai-shek. The radiant hopes and murderous hates that the Chinese peasantry poured into the sphere of war and revolution released a flood of emotional energy that exploded with the force of an atomic bomb within Chinese society, nearly dissolving it. The extent and depths of these passions could be felt and seen and heard in the trampling rush of peasant feet toward the landlord's manor; in the dying gasp of a village noble whose body, as well as whose land, was divided by club-swinging peasants; in the flash of a pig knife plunged into the heart of a clan leader whose ancestral tablets the farmers might normally have worshiped; in the shriek of a girl whose mother led Chiang Kai-shek's secret service to chop off her daughter's head and pull out her intestines; in the religious groans of village witches who called down gods to their incense tables and chanted in sepulchral tones: "Chiang Kai-shek comes !" in the snick of scissors wielded by women cutting off the flesh of a village oppressor; in the lamentations of village brides beaten by their husbands and in their murderous cries of vengeance as they organized themselves into Women's Associations and beat, scratched and tore the flesh of their hated lords and masters; everywhere on the good Chinese earth, across the plains, the mountains and the fields, these passions rose up as a new and unconquerable force. 
Primarily it was the task of the civil war and the revolution to canalize these tremendous emotions. 
There was almost no precedent to follow, no chart by which to steer. Where Chiang Kai-shek had been successful previously in maintaining his rule over the Chinese people, it had been because the despair and the hate of the masses had not been sufficient to stir them out of their traditional apathy. When new conditions arose and the peasantry rose angrily with them, it was necessary that Chiang Kai-shek try to understand both the conditions and the emotions of the peasantry. He failed in both respects; in fact, he did not even try to understand the hearts of his own people. That is part of the inner history of Chiang Kai-shek's defeat, and it is also part of the history of American policy in China. Neither the American government, the American press, nor the American people, nor many of their representatives in the Far East in the embassies, the military establishments, and the business offices sought to look beyond their own narrow national or personal interests toward the heart of the admittedly ignorant, but terribly emotional, bitter men and women of China. 
To all such people, one could justly address the words Mohammed used to denounce the Meccan merchants:
But ye honor not the orphan
Nor urge ye one another to feed the poor.
No such words could be addressed to the Chinese Communists. For they themselves were prophets—false or true ones, as the case might be. And in their character of prophets, they found a chart—a technique—for navigating through the stormy waves of emotion raised up by war and revolution that was very simple and very old. It was the technique of Amos who brought Yahweh thundering down from the heights to rage against the ruling classes of Israel.
I hate, I spurn your festal gatherings.
Even though you offer me burnt offerings,
And your cereal offerings, I will not accept them.
And the thank offerings of your fatted beasts I will not look upon.
Take away from me the noise of your songs,
And to the melody of your lyres I will not listen.
But let justice roll down like waters,
And righteousness like a perennial stream.
With such words, the prophets of Israel transformed God, and with such words, the prophets of Communism have and are transforming Chinese society.


## 2.The Civil War Begins
When civil war began in China in 1946, I was in the United States, trying like so many other people to put in order a life that had been uprooted by many years of war. I had been away from China for four years, and although, during my absence, great changes had taken place in that country, one thing remained the same. There was no peace. For immediately after the conclusion of hostilities against Japan, the Chinese people had plunged into a civil war that was incomparably more vast, terrifyingly more impassioned and dangerously more important than any conflict they had ever waged in the four thousand years of their tortured history. 
The fact that a supposedly pacific people should emerge safely from the purgatory of a brutal foreign invasion only to end up by hurling themselves at each other's throats appeared, on casual glance, shocking. Fighting across the heart of China, both inside and outside the Great Wall, the Nationalists and Reds, after a brief truce engineered by George Marshall, had by the middle of 1946 begun snarling over the bones of Chinese civilization with a ferocity they had seldom shown in fighting the Japanese. 
This admittedly horrible phenomenon was attributed by different people to different causes. The Old China Hands ascribed the outbreak of civil war to the barbarous nature of the Chinese people who were incapable of governing themselves, while the New China Hands put it down to corruption of the Chiang government and the intransigent power lusts of the Reds. The Chinese students found the cause in the fact that Chiang's gestapo murdered their professors who were advocating peace; the Chinese intelligentsia found it in the arms America was pouring into Chiang Kai-shek's war machine; and ex-Ambassador William C. Bullitt in the Yalta deal whereby President Roosevelt invited Stalin to come into Manchuria and join the war against Japan. All of these reasons suggested by every variety of personal prejudice may have satisfied their advocates, but in the light of historical facts they appeared quite unconvincing. 
Take only one example—the Yalta deal. If we were to believe the logic of Mr. Bullitt, had President Roosevelt not invited Stalin to fight Japan in Manchuria, Chiang Kai-shek would have won complete control over all of China and made the Communists so weak that they either would not have dared to resist China's dictator or they would have been wiped out within the space of a few months. Such a logic, of course, ignored the fact that the Communists had been fighting Chiang Kai-shek for twenty years and had never been wiped out and what is more had fought the Japanese for eight years and instead of growing weaker, as did Chiang, had actually grown stronger. More important, however, if one were searching for causes, was the fact that wars had been going on in China ever since the Western powers blew open the doors of the Orient and produced such fatal contradictions in that ancient Confucian society that they had not been solved to this day. The Opium War of 1840, brought on by the British, the twenty bloody years of the Taiping Rebellion, the Mohammedan Uprising, the Western powers sacking of Peiping, the Boxer Uprising, the Communist-Kuomintang civil wars and the very terrible, but nevertheless true fact that there had been scarcely a single year of peace in China since the 1911 Revolution overthrew the Manchu Empire—all these bloody events were undeniable proof not only that the Russians were not responsible for the civil war in China and had very little to do with it, but were also convincing evidence that this war was practically inevitable. 
Therefore, as I sat in America watching the unfolding of still another civil war in China, I was not unduly surprised, but I was sad for I was very fond of the Chinese people. The tragedy of the war was that so many Chinese were against fighting it, not only the common masses, but even some of Chiang Kai-shek's older generals and members of his party—the Kuomintang. These men, however, were lackadaisical in their opposition, and it remained for liberal quarters to raise the loudest voices in favor of peace. The opposition of these liberals was particularly strong during the Marshall truce negotiations when a number of professors tried to stand up against the rightist clique in the Kuomintang which was the most active force in China against peace and for all-out civil war. A vivid picture of this suppression of Chinese intellectuals comes from a quarter where you might least expect to find it. I refer to the writing of an American missionary Dr. James G. Endicott, who spent twenty years in China, was once an adviser to Chiang Kai-shek on social problems, and also a secretary to Madame Chiang Kai-shek. In 1947, Endicott left China and soon made public his reason for doing so. He wrote: 
There were increasing signs everywhere that Chiang did not intend to keep his promises [to General Marshall] and was preparing for all-out civil war. At the time he was anxious to silence all liberal opposition. . . . Accordingly in June, 1946, just before he tore up the Marshall truce agreements and launched full-scale civil war, his gestapo was ordered to murder in cold blood this committee of 12 professors [a group of Chinese professors, some educated in the U. S. who were active in trying to promote a middle-way compromise government]. 
The first one, Professor Li Kung-po was shot down on the street together with his little son. The next day a famous old classical scholar, Wen I-to, was shot while coming away from a meeting. That night all the other 10 of the committee were marked for killing. But one of them got to the U. S. consulate and persuaded the U. S. consul that they were the victims of political persecution. This courageous U. S. consul put on an army uniform, put the U. S. flag on his jeep, and went out and collected nine of the 10 and took them to the consulate for refuge. The 10th took refuge in a high school which had a high wall around it. 
The 600 Chinese students manned the walls that night and beat off the gestapo agents who made several unsuccessful attempts to get in. In the end, the U. S. government intervened on behalf of these professors, and they were flown out and given a chance to go in hiding or else leave the country. 
The murder of Li Kung-po and Wen I-to was a shock to me for I knew both of them and they were fine men. But like all Chinese liberals, they had no armed forces and they were nearly helpless. Perhaps that is why other scattered groups in China who did have arms refused to give them up to Chiang Kai-shek. 
At the conclusion of the Japanese war, the Nanking government had called on the Reds to lay down their arms, but not only had the Reds remained armed, but thousands of peasants and students who had allied themselves with the Communists to fight Chiang Kai-shek also held fast to their arms and prepared to fight any invasion by Chiang Kai-shek's troops of their local areas. Why? What inexorable force drove these non-Communists to support allies that were blacklisted by the recognized government of China? Did they really think that with the Japanese gone the rest of Chinese society would support them against the well-armed generalissimo? Even if they were afraid that Chiang might take away some liberties they had won during a painful guerrilla struggle, would it not have been better for them to give up their chimerical loyalty and take their chances with the generalissimo, instead of committing suicide with the Reds? 
For at that time, opposition to Chiang Kai-shek did seem suicidal. The generalissimo had an army four times that of the 8th Route Army, with a correspondingly greater firepower in artillery, machine guns and rifles. Moreover he had an air force, railways, gunboats and motor transport, while the Reds had none. Chiang had a comparatively potent economy in the fertile fields of the Yangtze Valley and the Canton delta; he held all the big cities and had the most powerful arsenals in Mukden, Shanghai and Hankow. The Communists were isolated in one of the poorer sections of China, had no cities of any size and only a primitive armament industry in the hills. Still more, Chiang held almost the entire seacoast, had access to foreign trade and was recognized by foreign powers, including the Soviet Union, as head of the legitimate government of China, but the Reds were shut up in the interior, carried on trade by bicycle and mule cart between primitive villages and were looked upon as rebels by the outside world. Unquestionably Chiang had the superior-looking war machine. 
Even to skeptical Old China Hands, this war machine appeared much more formidable than anything Chiang Kai-shek had possessed before the Japanese war when he was the undisputed ruler of China. Letters from American businessmen in Shanghai sent to me in the United States declared that the Americans had made the generalissimo's army a much different organization than the corrupt one I had known four years before. Well trained, well disciplined and well equipped, it had a high morale. "The Commies don't have a chance," wrote one American businessman. "The war will be over in a few weeks." 
Having been with over sixty armies of Chiang Kai-shek, I was very skeptical of this news. But events of China's war as they unfolded in the newspapers seemed to prove my friend right. Everywhere Chiang had victories. With the aid of American ships and planes, he quickly transported his best troops to all the large cities of North China and Manchuria while Red guerrillas raged at the gates. With ridiculous ease he cleared the countryside around Shanghai and Nangking and drove the vaunted Communist troops north of the Yellow River. "The Communists are babies; they don't know how to fight," said one Kuomintang officer. "The war will be over in three months," Chiang's top-ranking generals declared. American publications echoed these sentiments, and with no other news from China, it was hard to believe that the Communists had a chance to resist successfully, much less to win the war. 
Then in the middle of 1946, friends began to send me news of an amazing situation that was developing in North China—a situation which was later to culminate in continuous defeats for Chiang Kai-shek and a complete overturn of Chinese society. 
Though not very definite, this news consisted of several striking points. The Communists' 8th Route Army, driven back by Chiang Kai-shek, refusing to stand up and give battle, and abandoning all large cities, railway points and fortresses, had nevertheless not only maintained guerrilla bases in Chiang's rear, as it had done in the Japanese war, but was expanding everywhere in the countryside and slowly isolating the Nationalist army. As a result, though Chiang was still winning victories, his progress had slowed down and a long war appeared in prospect. Faced by this bleak future, many of Chiang's generals were covertly trying to halt the war, believing it could be decided only by political means. At the same time, hundreds of students, strait-jacketed by Chiang's intellectual terror, were running over to the Communist side and giving leadership to the peasants. More amazing still, businessmen, weighted down by heavy taxes and losing their factories in some cases to Chiang's so-called program of nationalization were becoming so wroth at the national government that they were actively organizing the shipment of American arms and ammunition to the Communists. In the middle of this explosive situation, the Reds, abandoning their ten-year reformist policy, had suddenly hurled a revolution like a bomb at the head of the generalissimo. 
There was not a word about this revolution in the papers. It seemed quite incredible. Nor did any of the pronouncements of our government officials, special investigators or China experts contain the slightest mention of this revolution. How, I wondered, could anyone hope to understand the events in China without knowing what the Communists were doing to the people in their areas? The answer was they could not. Not only news, but also policy, it seemed, was being made on entirely false premises. That was depressing. 
I knew that the only way to learn anything about this revolution was to go there. I excused myself by saying that life in China was filthy, miserable and boring—all of which was true—and that I was fed up with war, which was also true. Then I thought about the thousands of lives that were being sacrificed in China's civil war, about Li Kung-po and Wen I-to who had been murdered while trying to make peace, and about millions of starving farmers whom the Communists had hurled onto the bitter road of revolution. Could the comfort of one foreign life be better sacrificed than in trying to find out what this war and revolution was all about? 
In this somewhat solemn frame of mind, I packed my suitcase, said good-bye to my wife and boarded a slow boat to China.


## 3.China, 1947
It is not everyone who can land in a foreign country without a passport. I do not mean to say there is anything to boast about in the accomplishment, but at least it is indicative of conditions in the Far East that I landed in China, not once, but twice without being asked to show my American passport. 
The first time, in 1933, I did not have one. I was then an Able-Bodied Seaman on the "President Johnson," an ancient hulk of a ship, built in 1904, with wooden decks that leaked. I had ten cents in my pocket, but being then just twenty-three and of a romantic nature, I jumped ship in Hong Kong determined to see the Orient. I planned to stay two weeks, but learning to like the country, remained nine years. 
The second time, I really had a passport, but I never used it. We had anchored off Tangku, dirty port of entry for Tientsin after a miserable forty-two-day trip across the Pacific. It was December 1946, and the Chinese dollar, like the temperature, was falling fast, so that the ordinary civilian was not only cold, but hungry, being unable to exchange worth­less paper money for either fuel or food. We were not surprised then when a suave customs official, having boarded us from a launch and having announced that he could not possibly take us ashore, as it was against regulations, confided in the same breath that he was the father of many children and was loath to see them starve. His story was long, but lacking in the customary Chinese nuances, so that we quickly grasped his point. When he saw we understood him well, his manner underwent a change and he brusquely demanded from me a leather jacket (which he did not get). He also demanded two hundred American dollars and a gold wrist watch (which he did get) from one of our passengers who had a trunkful of dyes that he valued at one thousand dollars (though I believe they were actually worth fifteen thousand on the dye-short Tientsin market). Then this father of seven, forgetting his customs regulations unceremoniously, dumped us ashore in an empty North China field where neither we nor he would be inconvenienced by any customs or immigration formalities. 
That, without any exaggeration, was exactly how I returned to China, after a four-year absence; and that was the first indication I had that the officials of Chiang Kai-shek were still the same old masters of the art of squeeze that they always had been. 
Fortunately for us, some American troops bivouacked in the area pitied our condition and took us off to their headquarters in Tangku. There was, if I remember rightly, a company of them guarding a dump of ammunition that was scattered in the fields in the heart of Communist militia country. The soldiers were homesick and disgusted, believing they were being made the suckers for an American policy of which they did not approve. Evidence that their fears were not entirely groundless can be gleaned from the fact that several months later, when they were about to leave China, Communist militia, believing the ammunition was to be handed over to Chiang Kai-shek, attacked the dump, wounding several GI's. American authorities, highly insulted, announced that since the militia had been so premature, the ammunition would not be dumped in the sea, as planned, but would be given to Chiang Kai-shek. This way of spanking the Communists fooled nobody, as nearly everyone was of the opinion that the Americans would have given the ammunition to the generalissimo anyway. 
Leaving the homesick Americans at Tangku, I passed through Tientsin to Peiping, entering the crenelated battlements of the Tartar City on the last day of 1946. I had last seen Peiping under Japanese occupation and had left the city in 1939 in company with Colonel Joseph W. Stilwell and his family. Stilwell was then on his way home to report to G-2 with whom he was at loggerheads for their refusal to put much credence in his reports about the rising menace of Japan and the need to give the Chinese help. 
That was all long ago, and I only mention it because in 1945, just after the surrender of Japan, when he was still in Okinawa, General Stilwell requested permission of China to pay a last visit to Peiping, but Chiang Kai-shek, making much of an old feud, denied him entrance, so that Stilwell returned home and shortly thereafter died without ever having had the opportunity of seeing again the city he so much loved. 
Had he been able to come back with me now, he would have found Peiping in outward appearance little changed. Under the cold and sparkling North China sky, the former capital still glittered with all its old fascination and wonder, and in many imperial parks gaily dressed boys and girls skated on frozen moats so that it was impossible to believe in the China of grinding poverty, civil war and revolution beyond the curving palace roofs. Already, many Old China Hands had returned to the Hutungs and, picking up the threads of their former lives, had immolated themselves in quiet gardens, living once again the old lazy life, seemingly quite unaware of the historic drama that was being played in the blood-stained fields of China beyond the city's insulating walls. 
And yet, during the New Year holidays, all the defensive masonry of the old Chinese capital could not keep out the atmosphere of war and revolution that hovered over China from Harbin to Shanghai, from the Yellow Sea to Inner Mongolia. In the middle of the Christmas holidays, two American marines allegedly had raped a Chinese girl on the glacis outside the old Legation Quarter, and this deed had been enough to set aflame the already exacerbated national feelings of thousands of students then gathered in Peiping. 
In 1936, I had seen ten thousand of these students, defiant of the gendarmes' clubbings, parade through the Tartar City shouting in a mighty chorus: "Resist Japan! Reject the demands of Japanese imperialism for the separation of North China." Now, at the end of 1946, beneath these same ancient walls, I was to see another generation of students, undoubtedly the political and spiritual descendants of the first, raise once again the old nationalistic banners and go marching through the streets, but this time they shouted: "GI go home! We are free now. Down with American imperialism!" 
The remarkable thing about these two demonstrations was not that they were both made by Peiping students, not that they were both against foreign countries, but that they were both made in defiance of the wishes of the Chiang Kai-shek government. Ten years—two generations of students—and yet both were proclaiming the freedom of the nation in opposition to its leader ! There was a lesson here for anyone who had the eyes to read it. 

One did not have to be an international spy to discover that many Chinese intellectuals in Peiping, outside of government circles, believed that America was primarily responsible for the continuance of the civil war in China because she was arming Chiang Kai-shek. Nor did one have to be a prophet to conclude that the longer American troops stayed on Chinese soil, the easier would it be for the Communists to sell their propaganda line to the people that Chiang Kai-shek had become a tool of the United States. 
Because of these and many other factors, the whole American effort to bring about a truce in China's civil war was then crumbling rapidly, and no one seemed to know what to do about it—least of all the American officers of the Executive Headquarters in Peiping. These officers had set up shop in the Rockefeller—founded Peiping Union Medical College and gone to work with such a feverish energy that admiring Chinese scholars soon nicknamed Executive Headquarters the Palace of Ten Thousand Sleeping Colonels. 
Whether the colonels slept or not is somewhat immaterial, for by early 1947 the so-called truce in China's civil war had become little more than a ghastly legend. And while Communist representatives were hobnobbing with Chiang Kai-shek's officials in Nanking, Shanghai and Peiping, the soldiers of both sides were ripping one another apart on the fields of Manchuria and North China. 
"At the top they drink toasts to one another, but here we plunge the white sword in and drag the red sword out." So went an ancient Chinese saying. Probably it characterized the situation in China in January 1947 better than anything else. 
The tragic irony of this farce was not entirely lost on the head of the American truce mission, George Marshall, and in the middle of January 1947, he admitted failure, packed up and went home, leaving behind him a bitter statement which, in effect, said: "a pox on both your camps." 
After Marshall's statement, no clairvoyance was needed to see that China's already full-fledged civil war would become an all-out conflict for control of the Asiatic continent. Because the routes might be closed at any moment, I decided to go immediately into the Liberated Areas.1

1 Chieh Fang, or Liberated Areas, was a term adopted by the Communists in the Japanese war to indicate all areas free of Japanese troops. It was retained in the civil war and was used as a generic term to indicate all areas which Chiang's troops did not control. The term Communist areas was seldom used.


## 4.With UNRRA
Just where to go in Communist areas, however, was somewhat of a problem. Ten years before, when Edgar Snow broke the Kuomintang blockade and became the first foreign correspondent to visit Red territory, the Communists had been confined to a very small area in the northwest, and he could, so to speak, put his finger on them. But now the Communists were wandering to and fro across the continent from the borders of the Soviet Union to the Yellow River, and it was hard to decide in all this vast countryside where to contact them. 
I could have taken one of the American courier planes which were then still flying to the Communist capital at Yenan, but that cave village had become kind of a tourist center with every foreign correspondent in China hopping over to have a quick look at Mao Tze-tung and Chu Teh, leaders of the Communist party and army, and I had no desire to get mixed up in that circus, fearing it might be very difficult for me to get in close contact with the people, the war or their revolution. 
I also might have gone to Manchuria, but the northeast was outside the mainstream of traditional Chinese life; there was no violent struggle against feudalism there, no great land problem and hence no particularly revolutionary situation, and besides, Manchuria, contrary to popular opinion, was not the decisive theater of war in China. I think it was this last that decided me to go elsewhere in the country. 
At the moment, the most decisive theater of war lay on the North China Plain, a vast flat pavement, filled with ninety million people, that lay between Chiang Kai-shek's capital in Nanking and his troops in Peiping, Tientsin, North China and Manchuria. Unless the generalissimo could beat his way across this plain and link up his capital with his isolated troops in the north, he could not hope to unify China. Opposing the march of the generalissimo from the south and lying between both his southern and northern forces were two Communist generals, named Chen Yi and Liu Po-cheng. The first of these generals made his headquarters in the seaboard province of Shantung, north of Shanghai and south of Peiping. The second, one-eyed General Liu Po-cheng, roamed far and wide over the four-province border region of Shansi, Hopei, Shantung and Honan, sometimes operating on the plain and sometimes retiring into the mountains of Shansi Province which dominated the plain on the west. I decided to beard this latter general in his mountain lair, if he was available. 
General Liu Po-cheng was not only one of the ablest, but also one of the most colorful of the Red commanders. A former associate of Dr. Sun Yat-sen, he had revolted against Chiang Kai-shek after 1927 and joined Mao Tze-tung in the first Chinese Soviet on the mountain of Chikanshan in South China. At one time, he had been chief of staff of the Red Army. 
At another time, he had attended the highest military schools in the Soviet Union. He had been in the vanguard of the Red Army's six thousand miles Long March in 1934 and had eaten the blood of a chicken with a Lolo tribal chieftain so that the Reds could obtain safe passage through the land of those savage tribesmen. During years of combat, a hand grenade had blown out one of his eyes so that he had acquired the nickname of Blind Liu, the One-Eyed General, etc. Sometimes, he was referred to as the One-Eyed Dragon, as, according to Chinese lore, a dragon symbolizes power and cunning. He had also been wounded several other times, but always on the right side, so that sometimes he was also known as the Rightest General. There was in those days a saying among military men in China that there were three and a half strategists in the country. Liu was recognized as one and a half of these. 
To get to Liu's headquarters near Hantan, three hundred miles away across the plain from Peiping, I would have to go at least two-thirds of the way by cart, around a few Kuomintang-held cities and by myself, without an interpreter. However, as I spoke quite a bit of Chinese and as I would thus have an opportunity to observe the Communist rear areas without being overseen by a Chinese translator, I did not object to these conditions too strenuously. 
Although to get to Liu's headquarters was not so hard, to get into the Liberated Areas in the first place was another matter. To solve this difficulty, some Communists in Peiping had persuaded UNRRA to drop me over the lines by means of one of their ambulances which were about to run supplies into Red areas. 
I spent several revealing days with UNRRA people in Tientsin and later during the course of a year, here and there, I came to know a number of these men and women quite well. As I look back over a long series of fouled-up situations that I have seen in ten years of war, I am inclined to say that UNRRA's work in China was tops on my snafu list. There were Americans, British, Australians, Canadians, Yugoslavs, Frenchmen, and Austrians; in fact, the nationals of a score of different countries working for UNRRA in China—and I never found one who was not amazed at the foul and corrupt use made of UNRRA supplies by the Chiang Kai-shek government. What seemed even worse, however, to many of my UNRRA friends was the way the American government toadied to Chiang Kai-shek and let him get away with a monstrous misuse of supplies that had been contributed by the people of fifty-two nations to alleviate the suffering of people made needy and destitute by the war. 
To begin with, there was outright discrimination against the suffering people of North China because they happened to be in Communist territories. This was in direct violation of an UNRRA resolution which provided that "at no time shall relief and rehabilitation supplies be used as a political weapon and no discrimination should be made in the distribution of supplies because of race, creed or political belief." In China, however, it was quite obvious that discrimination was being practiced, and deliberately. Of the estimated 266 million Chinese people who had suffered under Japanese occupation, 120 million (150 million, if Manchuria were included) lived in the Communist-led Liberated Areas. If UNRRA supplies were to have been distributed on a fair basis, at least half of the 2,700,000 tons shipped to China would have gone to the Liberated Areas. Actually, 2 per cent went to the people living under the Communists and 98 per cent went to Chiang Kai-shek. 

Every device from passive blockade to outright military attack was used to keep UNRRA supplies out of Communist areas. Far worse than this, however, was the way officials became wealthy by means of supplies meant for their own people. 
These practices had a demoralizing effect on UNRRA workers. Many of them had volunteered out of idealistic motives for the work, some of them had been sent out under church auspices and received only thirty dollars a month, so it was doubly disillusioning to them to see trainloads of food that were meant to go to China's starving peasants go one thousand miles into the interior and then come one thousand miles back again by truck and boat to be sold by the military on the black market. I shall never forget the American girl who had volunteered to take care of some orphans. UNRRA had sent her supplies to feed her orphans, but Chiang's officers prevented her from getting the food. Many of the children had died while the food that would have saved them was being sold out of a warehouse just around the corner. "This is enough to make a Communist out of me," she had written in a letter to her superiors in Shanghai, who had filed the usual protest, knowing full well that nothing would come of it. 
I was surprised, too, at the depth of the feeling of some of the youthful UNRRA workers. Many of them had been in the American Army and some had been members of the European underground against Hitler. They knew what they had fought for; and they were against the way Chiang Kai-shek horned in on an international project and stopped relief supplies from going into North China; that is, to the very people who had suffered most in the war against Japan. 
Just now, Tientsin UNRRA was trying to find a route to send medicines and hospital beds across the lines to Communist areas. This was a rather tricky business. The boundaries between the two forces were constantly changing, there were no roads, and soldiers of both sides sometimes took pot shots at UNRRA trucks. Nevertheless, this remained the best way of crossing the lines until Chiang Kai-shek eventually put a halt to all UNRRA traffic and one had to sneak across by oneself. 
After a few mild adventures, I made my way down to Tsanghsien, last Kuomintang-held city in this part of North China. There, I ran into George Barkley, a young American, who was just in the process of taking three truckloads of cheap beds over to the Communists. Such a cargo was more than worthless, but Barkley was very conscientious in his duties, taking risks which I am sure were appreciated neither by his superiors, the Communists, nor, of course, by the officials of Chiang Kai-shek. 
I told Barkley that I would like to go along with him; that I had to go. He got the idea that I should pose as an UNRRA representative. "Just ride along beside me and keep quiet," he said.
1 When the Japanese war began the Communists had only a barren territory in the Northwest with a million and a half people. When it ended they had more than 800,000 square miles with 140,000,000 people. Their lands grew twenty fold and their population nearly 100 times. Of course, they had firm control over neither. Yet, this remarkable fact alone suggests that Communist victory in China had nothing to do with supposed Russian help given the Chinese Reds after the start of the civil war. Actually the Reds won their civil war in the Japanese war. 
2 At this time, there were in the Communist areas, seven border regions, each with their own army and their own elected governments. There was no central government for the whole area. In 1948, however, several of these border regions amalgamated into the North China Liberated Area. This laid the foundations for the Communists to set up a central government of their own, should they so desire.


## 5.Into Red Areas
It was four o'clock in the afternoon, and already the light was turning gray. We knew we would have to hurry to make the thirty miles to Potow, first Communist city on the other side of the lines, before dark. Hastily we threw our cargo of iron cots and medicine boxes aboard the trucks and started out. As we wheeled through the gates of Tsanghsien's walls, a Kuomintang sentry at a barbed-wire barricade signaled us to a halt. 
"You know me," said Barkley, smiling down at the sentry who came up to the cab of the truck, gun in hand. "I've been here before." 
The sentry nodded. 
"Who's that one," he said, jerking his head at me. 
"UNRRA, too," said Barkley. 
I sat silently in the cab, pretending I did not understand Chinese and trying hard to look like an international relief worker. 
Having scrutinized me with casual curiosity, the sentry tapped our medicine boxes once or twice, then drew aside the barricade and motioned us out onto the North China Plain. 
Drawing away from the city walls, we crossed the Grand Canal and entered no man's land. Our road was an undulating cart track where we plowed along jerkily, now rising even with the fields, now falling abruptly where metal-wheeled carts had dug deep ruts. On all sides of us, the fields rolled away, flatly, looking bare, brown and decayed in the gloomy winter light. 
We went on for ten miles—fifteen—twenty—but there was not a sign of a Communist, not a soldier, not a gun. 
Dusk came. The countryside grew gray, the wind cold. The air was boisterous with a leashed-in kind of wildness. The noises of the sky and land were humming as if at any moment they would break into a violent, uncontrollable roar. The wind whistled past our topless truck with crazy laughter; the dust infiltrated around the flanks of our windshield in a dirty cloud and we lurched, rolled and plunged across the plain which fled away everywhere with harsh, monotonous flatness. 
We wished the Communists would pick us up quickly. We did not want to be shot at in the dark. We examined the plain to the limits of the horizon, but saw nothing. 
It seemed as if the Kuomintang army might have rushed in here and taken all the outposts by surprise. 
Turning from the fields, I bent down and lit a cigarette. Suddenly, below me, along the road on the right, there was a kind of stir, then a click, as of snapped rifle bolts, and at last—a terrifying shout. I jumped, as if struck, Barkley slammed down on the brakes, and a dozen armed men sprang onto the truck as if they would tear us from our seats. We came to a grinding halt. 
Unconsciously, I put up my arms to ward off blows, but that was not the intention of our boarding party. 
"We've been expecting you," said one of the men; "we'll take you into Potow." 
The militiamen—for that is who the boarders turned out to be—clambered aboard, some standing on the running boards, others lying flat on the hood of the radiator, and we went forward once more. A sharp crack rent the air and a bullet sang overhead like a bird. Our guards jumped from the truck; again we slammed to a halt: As more bullets whistled by, our guards ran forward, rifles in hand, bodies bent close to the ground, and mouths wide open, howling indistinguishable words. Passwords, we guessed, for the firing ceased, our companions returned to the truck and we went on again. 
Coming once more to the Grand Canal, we halted at a bridge while a wooden gate was swung back and then crossed the river and entered Potow, first Communist-held stronghold on the destroyed Tientsin-Pukow Railway. 
Inside the town, the streets were dark, there was no life and not a human being could be seen. We parked alongside a stone building; the guards got off and we waited in the trucks to see what would happen. In a moment, doors up and down the street flung open, small shafts of light shot onto the road and patches of men appeared beside the truck. 
"Ho ... Ha!" shouted some voices. Hands reached for the medicine boxes and carried them off in the dark. 
A guide appeared and led us into a large room which belonged to the local Chamber of Commerce. In the middle of the room was a pan of charcoal which strove desperately, but without much success, to dispel the cold. In the flickering light cast by two tallow wicks burning in cups of oil, I could make out four men. They introduced themselves as the mayor of Potow, the assistant mayor, the local head of Clara (Communist UNRRA) and the secretary of Public Relations—this last, a shy young man, with the gift of halting English, named Chen. One by one I nodded at them. Someone pushed a stool at me and I sat down. Next I announced that I was an American journalist. At this they looked doubtful. 
Had they not been informed of my coming? No, they had not. Was there not an interpreter waiting for me? No, there was not. 
I took out a letter of introduction and the pass that General Yeh Chieng Ying, chief of staff of the 8th Route Army, had given me. One by one, the mayor, the vice-mayor, the head of Clara and Mr. Chen went into another room and examined them. The caution they took to look at them in another room made me wonder if there were not secret marks on the letters. 
I knew these letters instructed the authorities in Potow to send me on to the headquarters of General Liu Po-cheng, two hundred miles away to the southwest, and I expected that after reading them the men would give me some word of welcome. But instead, they came back into the room, without saying a word, and stared at me. Barkley, presuming on a previous acquaintance, tried to say something on my behalf, but the mayor only grunted and said: "The letters are clear." That was all. 
I must confess that this cold reception astonished and, at the time, even angered me. Back in 1939, when I made my first trip to Chinese Communist territory, General Hsiang Ying, commander of the New Fourth Army, had walked ten miles over a mountain so that he could greet me on the trail and personally lead me to his headquarters. Trees and rocks along the paths had even been decorated with signs welcoming me to Communist territory. But now how different everything was! The attitude of these officials seemed plainly to say: "We don't want you." I began to understand from their looks and vague answers to my tentative questions that they were suspicious of me, an American. I was afraid that if I were received everywhere in this fashion my trip might be unproductive. 
The next morning, I began to feel even more doubtful. When I got up, Barkley had already gone back to Kuomintang areas, and there was no one else around, so I went out by myself into the streets of Potow. I saw our tea boy poised atop a ladder, busy drawing some Chinese characters beneath a huge portrait of Mao Tze-tung, Communist party chairman, that was painted on the wall of the Chamber of Commerce. I photographed the painting, but a passer-by immediately halted and wanted to know if I had permission to take pictures. I wanted to say: "If you can paint pictures, why can't I take them," but I merely pretended I did not understand Chinese in order not to become involved in an argument. 
Taking a turn down the street, I was immediately joined by a small boy who ran alongside of me shouting words that sounded like, "Mei Kuo fan tung." Now, mei kuo means America, but fan tung, as far as I had ever heard it, means rice bucket, and to call someone a rice bucket is the same as saying he is good for nothing but eating; or another way of saying a man is fat. Since I wore a fur-lined pilot's suit and since I must have looked well padded, I was not inclined to take offense at being called an American rice bucket. However, on walking a few steps further, a group of militiamen who were standing before a wall practicing songs, suddenly turned toward me, grinned and began singing: "First we had the Japanese Devils and now we have the Mei Kuo fan tung." I could not exactly understand it, but the general sense was quite clearly uncomplimentary and it was not long before I realized that I was being called a "fan tung pai"; that is, a reactionary. Being the only foreigner in town, I felt rather blue at being publicly ridiculed, but solaced myself with the idea that now I knew how a Chinese laundryman in America feels when children run after him shouting "Chinkee, Chinkee, Chinaman.” 
As a matter of fact, the treatment I received on my first morning in Communist territory was extremely mild to the receptions that other foreigners sometimes met in Chinese villages. Later as the war became more bitter, as President Truman evolved his anti-Communist policy, and as American-made planes bombed Communist villages, many Chinese peasants crudely insulted all foreigners in their areas. 
Feeling lonely and without friends, I went back to the Chamber of Commerce and engaged our tea boy in conversation. He made more sense than anyone with whom I had yet talked. He said that the Japanese had had a garrison in Potow for nearly eight years. They were bad, he said, because they beat and tortured people. When the Japaneses left, Kuomintang troops had garrisoned the area for four months. They were no good either. They drank tea without paying for it; looted and broke furniture. Worst of all, in 1946, they broke open the Grand Canal dikes and flooded people's homes. That this was true I had ascertained for myself in a walk outside the town where I saw some homes still underwater and the local match factory filled with mud which the flood had left behind. Later, I was to get a look at Kuomintang flood tactics at firsthand and I learned that Chiang's officers, if they thought it would bring them any military advantage, would break open any river, regardless of the cost to the civilian population. 
My companion said he liked the 8th Route Army (Communist-led army) because it did not break open people's homes and did not steal food. Now, there was no 8th Route Army around Potow; the soldiers had gone for several months and there was only the militia. As for Communists—he did not know. Nobody had ever talked to him about Communists and he had never met one. 
Something along this line was echoed by the vice-mayor that night over dinner. 
"We are no-party-no-clique people," he said. "We don't necessarily want to follow the Russian way." 
Thus, by my second night in the Liberated Areas, I had yet to meet my first Communist. I was beginning to wonder why I had come into the region. 
During the meal, it had been arranged that I would get a cart on the morrow and go to the town of Foutung, thirty-five miles away. There I would pick up another cart and continue on to the next stop and in this fashion proceed to General Liu's headquarters. It was figured I should be able to make the trip in eight or nine days. I thought that optimistic. It is hard for a cart to make more than twenty miles a day; it was snowing and besides it was just approaching Chinese New Year and I doubted if any farmer would want to take his cart out at this season, even for a foreigner. 
As I lay down to sleep that night, I was not very happy about the prospect for my journey. I would have much preferred to stay around the border areas and join up with some guerrilla outfit operating in no man's land. And while I welcomed the prospect of meeting the legendary One-Eyed Liu, I was not so sure that it made good sense to go wandering off through the countryside when everyone appeared so unfriendly. 
Now, it's one thing to understand the reason for the people of one country being unfriendly toward the people of another, but it's quite a different thing to be the subject of that unfriendliness yourself. If people yell anti-American slogans at you, you don't like it, no matter how objective you are. In all justice to the people of the Liberated Areas, I must admit I later was well received, but in those early days I felt very unwelcome indeed. 
It was in this somewhat despondent frame of mind that I set out to find General Liu Po-cheng and the headquarters of the Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan Border Region two hundred miles away.



# Ⅱ.Across the Great Plain 

## 6.Lost in the Snow
"Down with the landlords who drink our blood!" 
"Oppose Chiang Kai-shek's betrayal of China to America." 
"We did not become slaves of the Japanese militarists; we shall not become slaves of American imperialists." 
Under these somewhat disturbing slogans, I arose stiff and cold the next morning, and having changed four hundred thousand of Chiang 
Kai-shek's dollars for eighty thousand Communist dollars I was ready to start on my journey across the North China Plain. 
It was the day before Chinese New Year. 
For some days now the frost had been hardening the earth and the night before great black clouds coming from the west had brought snow which fell without interruption during the night and was still coming down as a crowd of children followed me to the outskirts of Potow's walls. 
A mule harnessed to a Peking cart waited for me beside the mud wall of a collapsing house. A small boy, carrying a whip, went from one side of the cart to the other, fastening the traces and adjusting the harness. 
The mule stamped his feet on the ground as if he were cold and drew back his lip and whinnied. My duffel bag was tied on the back of the cart on the outside; my camera case and typewriter placed under the roof of the cart on the inside. 
A curtain of interrupted snowflakes constantly sparkled in its descent to the ground. It powdered the heads of the children with fleecy covering. 
Everything seemed stilled under the silent fall of the snow. Save for the group of children around me, the streets were deserted. 
A young man in the uniform of the Potow Peace Preservation Corps appeared, announcing that he was my escort and would take me to the next county seat at Foutung. He walked around the cart checking my bag, the traces and the harness once again. He looked at me for a monment, where I stood, already white with snow, and said to me: "Why not get in the cart? You will be under cover then." 
I hastened to do so, entering a small house on wheels, which was protected from the elements by a blue cotton cloth fastened to a wooden frame running in an arch overhead and down the sides. Thus inclosed on three sides, I looked out the front of the cart as through a tunnel. 
The floor was covered with some filthy bedding. Sitting on it, I rested against the back and stuck my legs out the front. The cart seemed very small. 
The escort climbed aboard, seating himself in front beside my outstretched feet. The driver called: 
"Are you ready?" 
The children shrieked: "American reactionary, see you again." 
We were off. The cart moved slowly for a little way. The wheels were imbedded in the snow; the whole cart groaned with creaking sounds; the mule glistened, puffed and smoked ; and the whip of the driver snapped without ceasing, now on this side, now on that, lashing brusquely against the flanks of the mule which put forth its most violent effort and drew us clear. 
The day seemed to be growing grayer every minute. The snowflakes fell like a shower of cotton. Almost no light filtered through the great dull clouds which hovered like heavy dumplings in the sky and seemed to presage many hours of snow. 
I sat more forward in the cart and looked at my companions in the sad light of the stormy day. 
At the front, my escort dangled his feet over the edge of the cart. He was dressed in the darkest blue cotton cloth. A padded long gown, which he did not wear but flung around himself like a cape, added a touch of insouciance to his devilish air. From his peaked uniform cap, his black hair hung in long, loose locks, while across his heavy sensuous lips, a half sneer, half smile ran like a wave. He looked like movie actor John Carradine, but much younger. 
He was twenty-four and had for a time been in the 8th Route Army. 
He handled his Mauser pistol with professional ease. Whenever more than four or five people came across the snow-covered fields, he slipped the gun unobtrusively from its holster and laid it across his knees, not openly, but hid beneath his carelessly flung cloak. 
Our driver, with whip in hand, walked beside the mule. He had rosy cheeks, crooked yellow teeth and a sly expression. He was small for his age, being fourteen, but his face was as lined and careworn as a man of thirty-five. In keeping with his size, his whip was of Lilliputian proportions, being made of a stick about two feet long and a thin rope of the same length. 
Passing out of Potow, we headed on a cart track directly across the fields. Few people were on the roads. The snow and cold would have been enough to keep all indoors but, in addition, it was New Year's Eve, and the people were inside paying off old debts, doing homage to the Kitchen God or laying plans for a celebration. It was a lonely day to be abroad. 
We jounced across a great bare plain. Everywhere the land was flat, the horizon bound only by trees. The earth appeared old and worn, yet there was a certain barren picturesqueness in the leafless trees that raised their "bare ruined choirs" against the sky. The texture of these trees somehow seemed different than those in America, somewhat more delicate—a little feminine, with long slender twigs reaching out from branches like fine hair. 
The flakes fell in profusion upon the ugly brown plain until at last there was only a vast white expanse like a cloud beneath our wheels. 
Once, a flock of birds flew past overhead, on their way to some hidden roosting place, uttering as they flew a clear bell-like chirp; and there was something ethereal in those drops of melodious sound, which fell through the snowy silence like a disembodied song. 
This unexpected peace which I had found did not last long; for there was something so vast and overwhelming about this great North China 
Plain that it assailed the spirit with foreboding. We went so slowly that for hours the scenery never changed. Soon I felt engulfed in the immensity of the plain, lost in gazing upon it as one feels lost in gazing on the sea. I had the feeling of being an alien in a strange world: I knew not where I was nor where I was going. There were no landmarks, no roads, not even a sun to give a sign of progress or direction. 
Toward the middle of the afternoon, we stopped in a large village and the driver let his mule eat and drink. We entered a teashop. It was festooned with cobwebs, the dirt floor was sprinkled with manure and the corners of the room were filled with bags of grain, denoting a New Year surplus for the shop owner. Sitting cross-legged on a raised mud platform, we swigged tea out of bowls placed on a tiny table only four inches high. 
Behind me I saw incense sticks burning, and going to a corner, I noticed a few bowls of crullers, rice and poor food set before a paper drawing of the Kitchen God. With his long drooping mustache, he looked down in silent benevolence upon the food offered him, but blinked not an eye as the smoke from the incense sticks curled up past his face. 
I had heard much about the antireligion policy of the Chinese Communists, but here the shopkeeper had put up his paper god, seemingly with no fear that it would be torn from the wall. 
We started up again. Toward dusk I witnessed a strange thing. Sitting on the front of the cart with my feet dangling over the side and with my head just under the roof, I saw sudden flashes of fire, first on the right and then on the left, as of lightning, but so close to the ground that it could not be. I sat on the cart and waited for the flashes to be repeated, but saw nothing. Just then from a near-by grove of trees there burst forth an orange ball of light. It flared briefly against the gloomy twilight, then went out leaving the grove of trees blacker than before. I sat up straight and stiffened at this sight. There it was again-a sudden burst of fire and then blackness. In the moment that the lights flared I caught glimpses of figures, darting this way and that. They were all running close to the ground and it was from these figures that the fires seemed to start up and then die. 
As we drew close to the grove of trees, I jumped off the cart. 
Pushing through the outer trees, I saw a number of rounded grave mounds and, in front of them, two men and an old woman. In the hands of each burned a string of paper money. As the flames flared up, they threw the paper on the grave mounds. Then they knelt down on the snow and knocked their heads three times on the ground in front of the tombs. 
I realized that these people were but doing obeisance to their family ancestors, yet this simple ritual affected me strangely, being alien to my world or my spirit and having all the fascination of the unknown and the mysterious. I turned and went away. As we rode on, I saw more fires flaring from the fields and everywhere men knocking their heads on the ground before their ancestral tombs. 
We soon reached a village. Across a narrow alley between two rows of clay houses stretched an arch made of evergreen branches, hung here and there with yellow paper. In the middle of the branches hung four large characters made of paper flowers which said: PROSPEROUS NEW YEAR. 
We paused. A farmer asked me from what country I came. 
"America," I said. 
He grinned in friendly fashion. I looked past his grinning face and I saw behind him some large Chinese characters whitewashed upon a house wall. 
WE DID NOT WANT TO BE JAPANESE SLAVES 
WE DON'T WANT TO BE AMERICAN SLAVES 
I stared at these characters for a long time. It seemed so very strange to see these political slogans in this miserable village, far from America, from George Marshall or from President Truman. Noticing my attitude, my guard smiled. 
"It doesn't mean anything," he said. "Don't be alarmed." 
I asked the people what they were going to do that night and one man said: "We'll have a play and eat." Then he cut a fancy caper. "We'll jump around." 
I wanted to stay there and see how the villagers celebrated New Year's 
Eve and I wanted to have some fun and jump around myself, but it seemed as if I was only an outcast, doomed for the moment to meet only officials and mule drivers. 
It grew dark, the road disappeared, and the cold crept into the cart and made my feet ache with pain. Guiding ourselves toward a fire that gleamed on the horizon, we came to the large village of Chienchao which we entered through a clay wall. There was not a light to be seen anywhere; and it was like going through a wrecked German city in the war. 
There being no use in going further, we halted at a carter's inn. The boy led his mule into a yard, undid his harness and gave him grain. A cheerful voice yelled for me to come inside, and I entered a low-ceilinged room. In the feeble light cast by a wick burning in a cup of oil, I made out seven or eight men, peering at me with intense curiosity. Their faces seemed to leap at me straight from the Middle Ages. The innkeeper—a gay old robber with a bearded chin and drooping mustache, bade me to sit down on a bag of grain. 
Evidently feeling that this inn was not high toned enough for the "foreign guest," my guard went off to look for a place for me to sleep. 
For some reason, probably not having been informed who I was, or more probably not understanding just what a correspondent was, he had told the people I was an UNRRA representative, and I was making an inspection trip to Hantan, preparatory to sending in grain and medicine. 
Such an introduction, I admit, could not have been more calculated to put the people on my side, and I fully expected that they would tell me they were starving and could I not help them out. Instead, to my surprise, they told me they had enough to eat. Because of reduced taxes, they were better off than they had been for fifteen years. The government, they told me, collected only seventeen to eighteen pounds of grain for each mow of land (one-sixth of an acre). Before they had had to pay innumerable surtaxes, including pig-killing taxes, drying-vegetables-on­the-roof taxes, funeral taxes, and besides had to furnish much free labor. 
They thought there was justice in the present tax system. 
My guard returned and led me through the town to a courtyard where a bonfire had been lit specially for my benefit. Several young men and an old patriarch gathered there and demanded that I eat something. My guard, who by this time fancied himself a dictionary of my habits, said with some severity: "He eats only sweet things." Where he obtained this idea, I do not know, but it made little difference; for the food that was brought was a piece of salted pork fat and a bowl of greasy greens. 
I found it very unappetizing, but seeing that they were poor and had put themselves out for my benefit, I ate as much of it as I could swallow without being sick. 
Shortly afterward, a representative of the county government who was posted here at Chienchao came to visit me. Back in 1937, when the 
Japanese invaded China, he had been a schoolteacher in this, his native village. When the Japanese drove Chiang Kai-shek's troops out, he had formed a guerrilla band with a few of his students. Many other bands had likewise been formed, but most of them, under the name of resisting the Japanese, took advantage of prevailing chaos and became bandits. At one time there had been twelve different commanders in chief, each claiming to be the leader of the resistance movement around the town of Chienchao. In 1938, a battalion of the 8th Route Army passing through on its way from the mountains of Shousi to the sea, had suggested how the local bands could organize themselves, unite together and eliminate bandits. The local villagers, profiting from this advice, soon formed their own government which had led a haphazard existence in the fields for six years. When the Japanese retreated from the area in 1945, this government had moved in and taken over the towns. The young man seemed to be very proud of the government of which he was a member. 
"Our government," he said, not without affection, "is composed of 
Communists, Kuomintang members, liberals, no-party-no-clique people, old and young, men and women."


## 7.Eating the Landlords' Flesh
The snow was still coming down as shortly before dawn we set out once again. About ten in the morning we reached the county seat of Foutung where my guard was to drop me. The sight of this, my first goal, was something of a shock. True enough, Foutung was a walled town, but the walls enclosed mostly empty fields. Originally, Foutung had been a town of some five hundred families, but the Japanese retreating from the area in 1945 had deliberately set fire to the houses so that now the town was little more than a cold, bare icebox. 
Leaving me to shelter from the snow in a filthy stable, wherein hung an old and dirty picture of Le Ning (Lenin), my guard summoned the district magistrate, a gentle-eyed man who escorted me through the broken shards of the town to his office-a small hovel built of clay and barricaded against the cold by 1939 San Francisco newspapers. How these publications ever reached this primitive town on the North China 
Plain, whether they were brought in by the Japanese, or whether some rich landlord had come back with them from a journey to the big cities of Peiping and Tientsin was a mystery I could not fathom. From the walls there also stared down at me the bearded visage of Ma Ke SSu 
(Marx), and pictures of En Ke Le (Engels), Mao Tze-tung, head of the Chinese Communist party and surprisingly enough Dr.Sun Yat-sen, patron saint of the Kuomintang and Chiang Kai-shek. The magistrate informed me that the pictures had come from bookstores in Hengshui, a "warm and busy" city, thirty miles to the south. 
Also, a schoolteacher before the war, this magistrate on the arrival of the Japs had settled his wife and baby in a neighbor's house and become a member of the local guerrilla government. "It was bitter then," he said. 
"We used to move three and four times a day. Government was the same as now, but a little more simple." 
His main problem, at the moment, he said, was flood. The year before, many villages near the railway had been submerged, a few people had drowned, some had to eat leaves for a time, but no one had starved and now things were better. 
After the flood, some UNRRA supplies had come into the area. Not many and not of much use, either. Torn silk stockings and high-heeled women's shoes. "Maybe your wife or lover could use them," he said grinning, "but not our peasant women." I looked out across the mud and snow and the rambling medieval wall and wondered how many times this silly tale of UNRRA had been repeated all over China. 
I liked this young magistrate. He was simple, forward looking, sensible and seemingly close to the people. In the afternoon, after feeding me, he obtained me a cart drawn by two mules and driven by a cheery old farmer with such a childishly rosy face that my lips twisted in a smile as I looked at him. 
My escort, a gay young government clerk, ran alongside the cart, chirping encouragingly to the mules. "Go. Trrr--t! Trrr--t!" he cried, shrieking with delight and running along with the mules as they broke into a fast trot. Then he jumped on the front of the cart beside the driver, and flicked a long whip from side to side, giving wild cries, while the driver slapped the rump of the nearest mule smartly with a twig; and we went rocking down the road at a fast clip. Looking across the backs of the swaying mules at the gray sky and feeling the rattling motion of the cart beneath me, I got an impression we were about to leave the earth at any moment. 
"That's a pair of fine animals," I said to the driver, looking at the strip of clean red neck showing above his collar. 
The old man turned with a wide, pleased grin on his face. "Not bad," he said. "But not to compare with a mule I had before the war. That one could climb mountains like a tiger and swim rivers like a dragon. Would you believe it," he turned to the escort, "it took one's breath away, the rate he flew. He made 150 Ii [50 miles] in one day, not once, but a dozen times. Only had one fault. Ate too much. You'd think he was a locomotive, the way I had to shovel food into him. But what amule. When he died, 
I didn't eat mule meat. Gave him a burial just like a man. Just think,he lived seventeen years. Healthy. Ai ya!" 
"There's nothing wrong with your health, old countryman!" I remarked. 
The old man, overflowing with health and strength, smiled warmly. 
"Heavens, no! And why should there be? I get plenty to eat. The government gives me one hundred catties [ 130 lbs.] of millet a year. My brother peddles beans, my wife and sister make clothes. We get along all right. 
Will you believe it, we had pork on New Year's Day? We eat well." 
"Perhaps you eat landlord's flesh?" I suggested, turning a Communist slogan around. 
"You speak strangely, comrade." The driver laid his whip across his knees, removed his glove and wiped his mouth, frowning as though offended. "I don't eat anyone's flesh. Though I won't say there aren't some around here who have tasted the flesh of a landlord. Eh?" he finished, turning to the escort. 
"How?" I asked, taking out a cigarette and giving it to the old man. 
I waited while he struck a flint on a stone and lit up a piece of wheaten rope which he applied to the cigarette. 
"How do they eat the flesh of the landlord?" 
"Well, it's the landlords who ate the flesh of the people first. Today it's one man's turn, tomorrow another's. There's Persimmon Valley Village, for instance. Well, there was a landlord named Mu Shih-an there. 
Did he deal justly with the people? I'll tell you. He was a member of the Kuomintang. When the Jap Devils came, he drafted us for a joint defense corps. He said it was to fight the J aps and the 8th Route bandits. 
But almost at once he surrendered to the Japs. Then he told the families who had men with the guerrillas to call their sons home. 'I'm afraid the Japs will kill you otherwise,' he said. He promised that no harm would come to anyone who came back. When an 8th Route subcounty leader came back, he killed him and then held a public condolence meeting for him. Oh, he was two-faced, you know. After that no soldiers wanted to come back. So he killed the closest relative of anyone who had a son with the guerrillas. In all he killed one member of each of over one hundred families here. When he saw the Japs were winning, he rounded up thousands of us to carry stones to build Jap blockhouses. Everyone of those stones had our blood on it. And this landlord settled other men's lives as if he was God. One night one of our poor farmers, who had become a militiaman, ducked into the village to see his wife. Third 
Blossom was her name. Knowing he would leave her at sun-up, she took him to bed at once. We all knew he had come home, but no one said a word except the village chief, who went and reported to the landlord Mu. 
And Mu-the traitor!--comes and drags him out of his wife's bed and binds him up just as if he was a pig, and takes him off. Well, naturally, the girl tried to beg Mu to release her husband. But she was poor and of course no one interfered on her behalf. She went into the prison all shaking and asked: 'Will you let me see my husband.' And Mu Shih-an's dog leg says: 'Go out on the street and you'll see him.' Well, naturally, she thought he'd been released and she rushed into the street. She saw him, all right. Up on a pole, on the wall of a strong point that Mu had forced us to build with our scratched and bleeding hands—there he was. His head, anyway. All blood and his eyes half gouged. Crazy-that's what she went. Tried to climb on the strong point and get the head, but everyone pulled her off and took her home. That night it rained and the head fell down on the road. The next morning, at cock crow, she was out on the street. She found her husband's head and took it home with her. Three days and three nights she lay on the kang with the head clasped in her arms, kissing and fondling it, as if he were still alive. 
Like a tiger she was, or a bitch with her pups, she wouldn't let any of us near her. Nothing we did or said made any impression on her, she wouldn't let go of that bloody head for a moment." 
The driver had stopped and having put on his glove and picked up the whip, he said angrily: 
"Isn't that a shame to the people?" He brought the whip down furiously across the backs of the mules. "Isn't that eating their flesh?" 
"But you ate his, too," said the clerk, who had come back to the cart in the middle of the story and listened to the old man's words with a great deal of attention. 
"I remember the case of that traitor very well," he continued. "There were over four hundred accusations against him. Twenty thousand people from the whole chu1 came to the Settlement Meeting. Many women with bound feet could not get there, and they led him through the villages first so that everyone would have a chance to take their revenge. I'll never forget that march. I was one of the guards. As we approached the first village, I ran off in advance. And hardly had the traitor passed the first house when a crowd, armed with forks, hoes, pikes and clubs poured toward him. One woman had a pair of scissors in her hand. 'I want to eat traitor's meat,' she cried. When the cadres saw that mob, they knew the traitor would be killed at once before he could even get to the meeting ground. So they made a rule that the people could beat him, but not beat him to death. 
"Twenty miles he was taken through village after village, greeted at each by angry crowds. By the rule of the cadres, the peasants had been made to discard their clubs, but they beat him near to death, even as it was. They had kitchen knives and wanted four ounces of his flesh. 'Just four ounces, please,' they said. We had a hard time beating them off. 
"At first Mu bore himself well enough. But at one village he stopped in the middle of the street, blood and sweat pouring from his face, and cried out in a childish kind of voice: 
"'I worked for you here for eight years. . . . Haven't I even one friend? ... Isn't there someone here who will give me a handkerchief to wipe my head? ... Even a dirty handkerchief, a red handkerchief,that will be enough.' 
"I hated him, but that voice of his was like a pitiful baby's. He looked around with a hunted expression, seeking for, I suppose, a friendly face. 
'Just a piece of cloth, any little rag will do.' He said it again like a child pleading for a piece of millet candy. But all stood there, men and women, and glowered at him. Then someone said: 'Let us give you a ride-the-horse cloth.'2 At that everyone laughed and fell on him with their fists again. 'Don't hit him too hard.' I shouted, 'he's got to get to the meeting alive.' But I had a hard time dragging him away and one woman even followed us out of the village into the fields, clawing at Mu's face all the while. 
"When all the villages had looked at him, we took him to the settlement meeting ground which was near a pine-grove forest. On near-by walls drawings of his history had been painted. And in the forest the names of all those he had killed were listed on papers posted to the trees. 
That very morning the government had announced that Traitor Mu 
Shih-an would be executed and as I've said twenty thousand people came to the meeting. No sooner had they put the traitor up on the stage, than ten people rushed at him. 'You killed my son,' cried one. 'Don't talk with him; just beat him,' said another man pushing the first aside. 'That's right, don't talk; just beat him!' I heard hundreds of voices shouting those words and then the crowd started to rush for the stage. The chairman stood up and held up his hand asking for quiet: 'We can only beat him by groups,' he said. 'We must have order.' 
"There must have been seven or eight men in that first group to beat him. But others kept running onto the stage and jabbing at him with scissors and knives. I was down front and everyone was yelling: 'don't beat him to death ; we want our share.' I felt everyone pushing me from behind ... forward toward the stage. Aiya, it was ..."  
The clerk paused. 
"Don't forget Third Blossom," exclaimed the driver. "I was at that meeting, too. You may not know me. But I was there, too. I wouldn't eat landlords' flesh. I wouldn't eat any man's flesh. But I was there just the same and I saw everything. I'll never forget Third Blossom on that day. 
She'd walked thirty li to the meeting. Walked half the night before. 
What a shy girl she used to be. Never went out of her house alone. But that day-save us! —what a woman! I can still see her as she went right onto the stage before Mu Shih-an. 
"'Well, how are you Traitor Mu?' she asked. The crowd had grown still when they saw her-everyone knew her story. In the silence we could all hear his reply. 
"'Badly, as you can see.'"
"'Tell the people how you killed—' she choked and clutched at her breast. I don't know, her next words were a whisper, but they carried to the very edge of the crowd: 'a member of the anti-Japanese forces, my husband.' 
"'No, I didn't kill him.' 
"'Then who was it sent him out of this world?' Third Blossom raised her voice. 'Who was it?' 
"'The Japanese.'" 
"'It was you! You killed him ....'" 
"She had taken off her leather belt from her waist and she began to beat that traitor there in front of us all. I don't think I've ever heard such a shrieking. 'Beat him! Beat him!' Every time her strap fell, the crowd yelled and before I knew it I was yelling, too. To see that girl taking her revenge ... well ... what a sight ... she beat Mu Shih-an to his knees. . . . Oh, I shall never forget it. ..."  
The driver shook his head. "No, never. I wouldn't eat landlord's flesh. 
But Third Blossom, she had reasons." 
The old man jumped down off the cart and began to walk beside his mules. 
"How did the meeting end," I asked the clerk. 
"Well, after that girl beat him, several others rushed on the stage with clubs and knocked him flat. He lay still, pretending he was dead. The meeting had been going on three or four hours, but only forty men had beaten Mu Shih-an. The chairman interrupted things and called out: 
'Anyone who has bitterness from this traitor, stand up!' Five hundred people stood up. By that time, it was too hard to keep order. Everyone was trying to rush the stage at once. The cadres did not like the look of things and took Mu out in a field and shot him. They handed his body to his family who covered it with straw sheets. The crowd found out where he was and grabbed the body away from his family, then ripped off the straw sheets and continued to beat him with wooden clubs. One boy with a spear stabbed his corpse eighteen times in succession. 
"'You stabbed my father eighteen times,' he cried, 'and I will do the same.' 
"In the end, they tore his head from his body. For days after that, people would come and look at him in the field. Someone said : 'In the past you were a commander in chief and many people came to see you ; now you're dead, you can still draw so many people to visit you.' " 
When the clerk finished his story, he clicked his tongue. 
"Cruel, is it not," he said. 
"Cruel!" said the driver, who had dropped back and was walking close beside us. "What's cruel about killing a man that has killed over a hundred of his neighbors. I wouldn't kill any man myself. But how can you blame our people? The landlords all of them have been cruel to us all our lives. But that's the only one we've killed. All the others are living just like us. Cruel. Ah, well, what times we live in." 
He grew silent, staring morosely at his mules. 
We went on, none of us saying a word. It was growing dusk and we had not yet reached our destination. The wind was bitter cold. I got down from the cart and walked, trying to send some warm blood through my veins. As a village came into view on our right, I said: 
"It is too cold. If there is no need for hurry, let's spend the night in that village. Your mules are probably tired, old man, and it will rest them." 
We halted for the night in the village. After the freezing wind of the plain the mud hut was homely, comfortable and warm. The earthen floor stank of manure, and the stove, into which an old woman was shoving twigs with one hand and pumping a bellows with the other, smelled of sour burned millet. The old woman replied reluctantly to my questions. 
She had seen one son killed during the Japanese war and had seen her other son join the 8th Route Army to fight the Kuomintang and her husband join the rising against the landlords. As she started to tell me these things she threw off her reserve and spoke quite bitterly. 
"Look what kind of times these are we live in. When the Japs were here my old _man couldn't pay the tax and was struck two hundred blows by that dog leg Lu Wa-tsai. They made mincemeat out of his ass. Do you think he learned anything from that lesson? Not a bit of it. When the 8th Route Army comes he wants to join the struggle against the landlords. I said: 'remember your ass ; this time it will be your head.' 
Stubborn old man, do you think he would listen to me. Not at all. We argued the whole night. He became so angry that he beat me black and blue. Is that right to beat his own wife who's trying to keep him out of harm's way?" 
"If you opposed his desire to be free ..." said the clerk. 
"Free! Don't you come at me with those high-sounding words, young man. I know all about young men. My first-born was killed by the landlord when the Jap Devils were here. Then when the war was over, my second son wanted revenge. Came here with some kan pu ... When 
I saw what he was up to, my heart stopped. 'Get out of here, my bad son,' 
I said. 'Isn't it enough that your elder brother was killed and now you want to be killed too and leave your old mother no way to live.' He laughed at me. My own son laughed at me. As if that wasn't bad enough he went off and joined the army." 
"Look, old wife, you don't understand this matter clearly," said the clerk. "We all wanted peace, but Chiang Kai-shek invaded the Liberated Areas. He wanted to kill us all." 
"Who is this turtle, Chiang Kai-shek, that he can do with people as he wants." The woman stood up from the fire, her old eyes blinking from smoke. "Why don't you just kill him and make peace? When will this war ever end?" 
"Soon ... Don't trouble yourself about it." 
"Soon! But how soon! Don't you try to quiet me. It wants your very life to live in these times." 
"Hush up, old woman, you'll talk us all to death. You'll be giving this foreign guest a bad impression." 
"And do you think it's like that in his country?" the old woman retorted. 
I compelled them to make peace. After a bowl of millet, the old lady went out to feed her donkey in the next room, and the driver, the clerk and I bundled up on the kang. 
I woke up about midnight and lay with open eyes. The driver beside me was making a terrible racket snoring. As I looked at him, my thoughts turned again to his story of Third Blossom, then to the old lady and the county government clerk. At the memory of these things my mind was oppressed by the sadness of the life of the Chinese people. The driver snored interminably and finally I shook him. He groaned, awoke, rubbed his hand across his face. 
"Ai! Ai!" he sighed. Then turning over, he went back to sleep and commenced snoring once again.

1 A subdivision of a county.

2 A rag used after sexual intercourse.

3 Cadre or staff worker; anybody working in official capacity, such as government, army newspaper, land reform, even an actress. Not necessarily and most often not a member of the Communist party.

4 A large divan made of adobe bricks and heated by a complicated set of flues connected with the primitive kitchen range. Whole families-husband, wife, grandmother and children often sleep together on one of these kangs. Because in winter, there is no way to escape the bitter cold in the villages, except by curling up on the kang, North China women often speak of them as "own mother."


## 8.Traveling Companions
In springtime, when the Yellow River and the Grand Canal overflow their banks and the flood water covers all the low-lying water meadows, the North China Plain is like a vast garden where millions of people live, concealed by the softness of green massed trees, islands upon a softly undulating sea of waving grain. 
In the fields an impressive picture of country life unfolds and everywhere you cast your eyes peasants in blue jerkins are at work, methodically, thoughtfully, contentedly. 
In the summer, the sun beats down with undiminished force and no wind comes from the sea and the mud roofs in the villages crack and the first rain trickles through in numberless rivulets. In the summer, even at noonday it is quiet, for every man has hidden from the glare of the sun in his mud-brick house. 
In the autumn, as the kaoliang turns brown, the fields are filled again and there is the sound of winnowing and threshing and the merriment of harvest activity. But in wintertime the plain stands completely deserted, bare, fettered in a cold silence. The serrated edges of the treetops show bleak as telegraph poles against the pallid, wintry sky. Only the rabbits move about the fields, finding a safe haven beneath the untrodden snows. 
Across this barren plain, changing cart at every overnight stop, sleeping in peasant homes and with county magistrates, I continued on in a southwesterly direction toward Hautan and the headquarters of the Shansi-Hopei-Shantung-Honan Border Region. On the third day, I reached a suboffice of the Border Region government. Here-already sick of being pulled across the country by a mule at the rate of twenty miles a day-I was overjoyed to find a US Army weapons carrier waiting to take me on to Hantan. 
What an old war horse that weapons carrier was! The Americans had brought it from India across Burma into China; then Chiang Kai­shek's troops had taken charge of it and brought it north; and now, having been captured in battle, it was in the hands of the Communists. 
By this time, the old campaigner was much frayed from war and travel. The mudguards, cracked and battered, hung perilously close to the ground, the top had long since disappeared and wooden crossbars at the back were flying around at alarming angles, threatening to gouge out the eyes of any passenger. 
To navigate this monstrosity there was a whole crew-driver, head mechanic and two subordinates who sat with folded arms, like coachmen, on raised platforms on either side of the front seats. 
One hundred villagers came out to see the "foreign hairy devil" ride this "steam chariot." Unparalleled opportunity for sport! and they made the most of it, shouting like maniacs and seeming to say—"Why don't you get a mule ?"—when the head mechanic cranked for five minutes without result. 
Unable to bear the loss of face, the driver descended from his august perch behind the wheel, donned a pair of gloves, seized the crank from his mechanic and, with a professional whirl, sent the motor roaring into life. The crowd cheered. Doffing his gloves, the driver again ascended to his post behind the wheel. Then he threw out the clutch, threw in the gears, waved gallantly to the crowd, let in the clutch again and raced forward—exactly five yards, where he halted in a stall. 
After several false starts, we drew away from the village and climbed up onto a highway built by the Japanese. Though deeply rutted, the road was frozen hard and we soon got up a speed of twenty miles an hour. You might think this slow, but accustomed to making twenty miles a day, I thought we were flying. 
"Very fast. Very good," said a voice in a clear Peking accent in my ear. 
The speaker was a young political worker, on his way, like me, to the headquarters of General Liu Po-cheng. Dressed in a long gown and a fedora hat, he looked quite out of place in these country regions. As a matter of fact, he confided that the hat sometimes caused him trouble. 
Peasants, seeing in his dress the likeness of a village boss or a slicker from the Kuomintang-held cities, often hissed at him and called him "traitor." Being stubborn, however, he clung to the hat as to a talisman. 
As protection against the wind and flying dust, he donned a pair of goggles. Then he dropped a large scarf over his precious hat and brought it down across his face and neck like a veil. He looked exactly like an American automobilist of the early 1900's. 
Seven years ago, my companion had been a student in Peiping National University. In 1940, with one hundred youthful companions, he had run away to the guerrilla areas. Hiding in the wheat by day and crawling through the fields at night, he had reached the Taihang Mountains, filled with tears of joy at his first sight of a Chinese uniform. His tears had hardly dried when the Japanese came thundering into the mountains on one of their burn-all, loot-all, kill-all drives. Nearly every house was destroyed, the cattle slaughtered and the grain carried off. Life was so terrible that he often thought to run back to Peiping. Somehow, he had survived and now here he was doing political work among the peasants. 
After many questions, I asked him if he were married. He threw out his arms, laughed bitterly and said hurriedly: 
"Well, how could I? What time have we for women? We are always moving, we have no room of our own, no place to meet women, no time to find a lover and no chance to kiss." 
This last word he said in English, rolling it around on his tongue as if to savor a delicious foreign food. 
"Life is bitter here," he said thoughtfully. "We don't have any energy left for love. Worse than that there are no pretty girls. You won't find a pretty woman doing revolutionary work." His voice grew bitter. 
"Someone with bound feet," he said sarcastically, "that is all you can find." 
Never, he confided, had he known a woman as a lover. He spoke to me softly, hurriedly, all the time hunching his bowed shoulders, incessantly staring across at me with humble eyes. 
"When peace comes," he said, "I'll go to Peiping...."  He paused. 
Something in his gaze was so pitifully lonely, yet so mortally harsh, like the eyes of a stricken animal, that it was painful for me to look at him. He dropped his lashes over his eyes, and smiled forcedly, then suddenly blurted: 
"Moon . . . lover . . . kiss!" 
He said these words in English as if he had heard them long ago in some movie and stored them up in the secret recesses of his heart which now opened and gushed forth his mournful longing. 
Intellectual loneliness and nothing more! I decided harshly, wondering all the time how many more ex-students there were in this backward countryside longing for an idle hour of romance with some svelte girl from the city. , 
We jogged along through the interminable hours. Once in a while my companion would hum a song. Or maybe he would grow silent with dreaming. 
Sometime in the afternoon, we reached Hantan, a town of forty thousand people along the now defunct Peiping-Hankow Railway. Although the first real city I had seen since leaving Kuomintang areas, Hantan was only half alive. "American" planes, the mayor explained, had destroyed the power plant and the city was without lights. Afraid he might lose everything, the mayor had moved the cotton plant, the iron foundry and several small factories along with five hundred workers to safer regions in the mountains. 
Along with the industry, the Border Region headquarters had also taken to the hills, so that my journey was not yet ended. Left behind, however, to care for itinerant officials and traveling guests, like myself, was a charming Public Relations official, named Tsai. 
"How do you do I am well thank you welcome to Hantan." With these English words said all in one breath, he had greeted me before I had a chance to open my mouth. 
Like my truck companion, Tsai was a gentle soul, but no loneliness clouded his busy days. He was married to an attractive girl, whom he called "my lover," and he had a five-year-old son whom his wife had taught to dance the Yangko (Planting Song) and to sing anti-Chiang songs. The Tsais had met and married in the guerrilla areas during the Japanese war. A few days after their son was born, the Japanese had closed in on their guerrilla band and both father and mother fled, leaving the child with a friendly farmer. Not until two years later were they able to return and reclaim him. 
I was to find that many cadres of the 8th Route Army hid their children in peasant homes, but not all of them had the luck to get them back again. Sometimes the farmer would be killed or he would move and the child could not be found. In other cases, the child, brought up to call the farmer "father," would refuse to recognize his real parents when they came to claim him. Or the farmers, wanting the labor of the extra sons, would be unwilling to give the children back. Finally, some parents, believing revolutionaries could not be burdened with children, surrendered them completely to the farmers. 
Hantan, having once been a railway metropolis and a collecting point for the grain from the villages on the plain and the local products from the mountains, and being a town of some size and hence able to offer a few amenities of life, I was afforded the first opportunity of my trip to visit a bathhouse. 
When I returned with the mayor from the bathhouse to our hostel, a man in uniform rushed out of a room and accosted us with great excitement. He pointed at a room on our right, hissing out the words—"fa kuo jen!” (Frenchman). The effect on the mayor of these words was startling. Coming close to me, he held out the palm of his left hand and on it with the finger of his right hand traced the character fa (France). Then he mysteriously pointed at his mouth and waved his finger back and forth several times as if to say: "don't talk." A few moments later, somewhat apologetic, he hastened to my room with an explanation. A French representative of UNRRA had just arrived from the south. If he learned that I was going to Liu Po-cheng's headquarters, he might want to come along. That would be embarrassing as the location of the headquarters was secret and only "trusted foreigners" were taken there. 
Shortly after this incident, Mr. Tsai brought into my room two glass bottles filled with a substance that looked like blood. 
"An American UNRRA doctor, named Harrison," he explained, "died near here two days ago. This is what he spit up before he died. And this is what he spit up after he died." 
Holding the bottles for me to see, Tsai looked grave. It was rather gruesome and the mayor hinted that there might be foul play behind Harrison's death. 
Later, when I read Harrison's diary, the reason for his death became clearer. Not long before, he had contracted to bring a freight car of supplies to Kaifeng, intending to ship them from there to the Liberated Areas. Kuomintang officials, however, had his freight car shunted onto a lonely siding in the Yellow River flood areas. There was no heat in the car, no food and no populated villages in the area from which he could obtain help. For a week, he huddled in the car, cold and hungry, but afraid to leave his supplies. Friends hearing of his predicament, finally persuaded officials to send the car on to Kaifeng. Weak and ill, but determined to finish his job, Harrison ferried the supplies across the Yellow River to Communist areas. There, however, suffering from exposure and malnutrition, he collapsed and died. Many UNRRA officials carrying supplies to the Liberated Areas were given the run-around like this by Chiang Kai-shek's officials, but Harrison was the only one I heard of that died because of these tactics. 
Stopping only overnight I left Hantan early the next morning on a charcoal-burning Japanese truck. Among the passengers was a girl dressed in an 8th Route Army uniform that fitted her like a potato sack. Her name was Jen Chi, and she could speak a lot of English. With us also came a messenger with several million dollars that he carried wrapped loosely in a white cloth. Conditions being peaceful in the area, there was little cause to worry about bandits or robbers, and even if there were, a robber could scarcely have run off with such a bulky bundle. 
We left the plain immediately, turned into the foothills of the Taihang 
Mountains and chugged upward at a slow pace, our truck trailing a thin stream of charcoal smoke behind. 
Here, on the terraces necklacing the hills, sprouts of winter wheat shot up from the cold earth. Over the rocky road, sometimes shadowed by cliffs, still lay drifts of snow streaming with moisture. A chill rose from the snow, but this chill was lessened by the sight of the wheat, young and warm with the feel of budding life. 
At intervals along the road we ran into mule-cart convoys carrying mountain products to the plains below. Meeting them in narrow ravines slowed us up and caused the carters inconvenience and the animals took fright at the sound of our motors and became tangled in their traces. 
Once we ran down a cart, caught its wheels in ours, and despite the plaintive protests of the girl, kept on going so that the cart turned over on its side and pulled the mule down on his back. The girl and my Peiping student friend, being intellectuals, complained bitterly to the truck driver that such actions, being unjust, would alienate the civilians from the government, but the proletarian driver merely grunted. 
As we went on, our journey was enlivened by some peculiar antics of this driver. Every now and again, he would put the car in low gear, pull down the hand throttle, and jump from his seat to the road. Then, picking up handfuls of snow, he would run alongside the truck and throw the snow in a small tank at the side. Whether this was to cool off the charcoal fire or to put water in the radiator was something I have not discovered to this day. 
Gulping snow and belching charcoal smoke, we drew into Wu An, a town set on a plateau between the foothills and the mountain walls further to the west. From the center of the town, a Catholic church and an ancient pagoda raised their spires high above all the other buildings as if competing for the religious affections of the people living thereabouts. 
Disdaining both the Catholics and the Buddhists, our truck turned off the road and entered the compound of what had been a Protestant mission. Once the compound might have been neatly kept, but now it was filled with auto wrecks, truck parts, and forty or fifty carts. On the ground, horses, mules and men lay amid fodder and manure. 
Our charcoal truck lacking the power to make the grade ahead, we changed into a jeep, loading all our baggage into it and five people besides. Miss Jen sat in the back seat, squeezed between bedrolls on one of which I sat. She held onto my coat so that I would not fall off. 
Though almost too good to be true, the girl was not without her interest, and later, as I came to know her better, I even achieved a kind of admiration for her. For a while she was my interpreter in Liu Po­
cheng's headquarters and I used to question her about her life, some details of which may be mentioned here. 
Hantan was her native city and she had been born the daughter of a landlord. In 1937, when the Japanese invaded China she was fifteen years old and a student in a lower middle school in Peiping. Not wishing to study under the Japanese, and Chiang Kai-shek's minister of education having issued a call for all middle school and college students to come to the interior and be educated free, she went home, picked up her younger brother and sister and fled the Japanese areas. For many months she wandered through central China, most often finding that, despite the promises of the Education Ministry, she could not get in a school without money. Evacuating Hankow on a ship with wounded soldiers and refugees on their way nine hundred miles up the Yangtze 
River to Chunking, she alone, among a horde of rich refugees had been willing to dirty her hands to care for the soldiers. Some Chinese correspondents taking interest in her case recommended her to school authorities and she was able to enter Nankai Middle School. 
This, as she described it, was a school for "young nobles," and she had a hard time making friends, constantly being snubbed by the sons and daughters of the rich. Soon she became disgusted at the lack of freedom in the schools and at the spies of the Chiang Kai-shek Youth Corps who went around with clubs and pistols beating up students caught reading any "liberal" books. Attracted by what she had heard of conditions existing in Yenan, the headquarters of the Communist party and the 8th Route Army, she had made her way there in the fourth year of the war. In Yenan, she had, among other things, studied English, which she spoke correctly, but slowly. There she met a young engineer, just returned from England. He had an English wife and child, but he had abandoned them in England at the outbreak of war in 1937 and returned to China and become a Communist. Miss Jen, thinking this sad, promptly fell in love with the engineer. 
At the end of the Japanese war, the engineer went to Manchuria with a detachment of troops. Miss Jen had tried to follow him walking across the barren mountains of the northwest to Inner Mongolia seeking a passage through the Great Wall. But she could not get past Chiang's troops and after many months of travel she returned to her home in Hantan. 
Dirty with the marks of travel and looking like a tramp in her ragged uniform, she had entered her mother's house. The mother was shocked by her daughter appearing in uniform and, not able to summon up any word of welcome, she blurted out: "You ought to get married." 
The land reform was just starting in Hantan and Miss Jen told her mother that they should give up some of their land to the poor. 
Shocked by this strange daughter, the mother replied: "It is destiny for people to be poor, can I interfere with fate?" But the daughter was persistent. After two nights, during which many tears were shed, the mother finally capitulated, signing away generous portions of her land to peasants who had none. 
Now, just turned twenty-six, Jen Chi was very serious about the fight against Chiang Kai-shek. She was not a Communist, but evidently was dying to become one. She wanted to be a heroine and do great things. 
She had never been kissed and thought the idea revolting. She could not understand the weakness of foreigners concerning these matters. 
Having once seen a movie in which the women spent a great deal of time fixing up their hair and putting themselves inside strange machines that wiggled their hips, she thought American girls must be horrid and very foolish. "How can they do such things?" she used to ask me. She liked to read books, especially books about war and strong heroes, but when I asked her about Tolstoy's War and Peace, she said she did not like that girl Anna (getting mixed with Anna Karenina) because she was too "weak." 
Now she was on her way to headquarters, hoping to find some way to get to her lover in Manchuria. So, despite all her pronouncements about heroics and the silliness of American women, she, too, it seems, was slightly infected with the virus of love. After spending three weeks with me, she did leave, trotting away on a donkey on a trip of over a thousand miles toward Harbin. I wish her luck; I hope she got through the lines and found her sweetheart. 
By now we were on a very rocky road. At last, it gave out altogether and we turned into a dried-up river bed then through a series of narrow defiles until we came out into a thin valley where all the villages, built of stone, and looking like forts, presented a grimmer aspect than those of the mud villages on the plains below. 
At dusk we arrived in Yehtao, military headquarters for the Shansi­
Hopei-Shantung-Honan Border Region. General Liu Po-cheng, at the moment, was not around, being off with the troops in west Shantung. 
General Po Yi-po, vice-commissar of the Border Region came to greet me with his English-speaking secretary, Mr. Li Teh-hua. After a few cursory words of welcome, he asked me my impressions of the Liberated Areas. I told him that I was annoyed at being stopped from taking pictures along the way, and he begged me to forgive them. 
"The local officials don't understand what a reporter is. Rest assured that you can take pictures of anything you want in our areas. We have no secrets. We welcome any journalist who comes to see the Liberated Areas. You can write about anything you see and see anything you want." 
I was a little skeptical of this carte blanche, but later I was to be amazed at the things the Communists did let me see and the stories, both good and bad, they told me about themselves. As long as I operated in army or commissar channels I found that I had unbelievable freedom to see and investigate anything in the Border Region. It was only when 
I got out of touch with Communist channels and in the hands of non­Communist, so-called progressive students-especially the English speaking, chauvinistic ones—that I had trouble. 
For the moment, however, there were none of these difficulties. I was given a clean room in a stone house, with a kang to myself, a pan of charcoal, an orderly who had been captured from Warlord Yen Hsi-shan, a mirror, table, chair and a picture of President Truman.





# Ⅲ.Birth of an Army 

## 9.Chinese Commissar

## 10.Formation of a Base

## 11.Building Resistance

## 12.Kill All, Burn All, Loot All!

## 13.Famine, Locusts and Overturned Idols




# Ⅳ.Birth of a Government 

## 14.A Professor Searches His Soul

## 15.Border Region Bureaucrats

## 16.Village Democracy

## 17.A Beggar Writer




# Ⅴ.Border Region Society 

## 18.Death and Taxes

## 19.Taxes Without Death

## 20.Banking by Moonlight

## 21.Chicken Feathers, Stagecoaches and Telephone Lines

## 22.Class Society in the Classroom

## 23.Are They Slaves to Work?

## 24.Do They Live any Better?




# Ⅵ.Prelude to Revolution 

## 25.Contradictions in China's Development

## 26.The Land Problem




# Ⅶ.Land and Revolution 

## 27.The Peasant Speaks

## 28.Revolt of the Slaves

## 29.Plot and Counterplot

## 30.Stone Wall Village

## 31.Murder, Poison and Seduction

## 32.Land, War and Revolution



# Ⅷ.Into Guerrilla Country 

## 33.On the Road

## 34.Women’s Day

## 35.Guerrilla Girl




# Ⅸ.The People’s War 

## 36.Burying Them Alive

## 37.Brother Against Brother

## 38.Counter-Countersettlement

## 39.Guerrilla Commando

## 40.The Field Mouse

## 41.Mission Murder



# Ⅹ.The Revolt of Women 

## 42.Gold Flower’s Story

## 43.Sex and Revolution



# Ⅺ.Civil War 

## 44.Red War Policies

## 45.Why a General Revolts

## 46.The 8th Route Army

## 47.Chiang Kai-shek’s Army

## 48.Revolution and the 8th Route Army

## 49.Chiang Attacks

## 50.The Communists’ Counteroffensive



# Ⅻ.Dictator Vs. People 

## 51.The Republican Party and Chiang Kai-shek

## 52.Loot of Manchuria

## 53.Paradise Lost: Massacre at Formosa

## 54.The Rising of the Intellectuals




# XIII.Collapse of a Dynasty 

## 55.Military Collapse

## 56.Chiang Kai-shek

## 57.The Last Rulers of Old China

## 58.The End of an Era



# XIV.Chinese Horizons 

## 59.Power

## 60.Property

## 61.Liberty







